 About the Author: John D. Norseen is a D.Sc. (ABD) at George Washington University, where he teaches Engineering Management graduate courses in the Research and Development and International Marketing of Advanced Information Science and Technology. John is also under contract to Lockheed Martin where, as a systems engineer, he is working on special programs concerning next generation Intelligent Systems. His experience covers over twenty years of transforming creative ideas into the team production of critical national security systems.
Images of Mind: The Semiotic Alphabet
KEYWORDS: semiotics, 2-D to 3-D mental representations, left Occipital Areas L-17/18, invariance, quantum encoding, neuropil, lissajous, self-similarity, sentient
ABSTRACT: Left Occipital Areas L-17/18 seem to perform the same neurological functions for visual conversion of 2-D retinal visual sensory information signals into 3-D semiotic mental representations as the involvement of Broca-Wernicke area in the conversion of aural sensory signals into a finite set of sound types producing neurolinguistic patterns. Self-similar (ergodic) distribution throughout the brain of a visual semiotic language comprised of a finite alphabet of basic images would appear to consist of lissajous-like patterns operating in two modalities: resonating electromagnetic mode, and a morphological (structural reconfiguration) mode. Recall of visual forms of memory would suggest a biological identification via invariance as the result of quantum encoding in the protein microtubulin (MT) of the neuropil. Machine emulation of human sentient computing would require both local and non-local access to binding networks of semiotic languages in the brain.
1.0 INTRODUCTION
1.1 There is a preponderance of uniquely human brain structure related to sentient processes on the left side hemisphere of the cerebral cortex. This is most likely due to the flow of blood from the heart (Pribram, personal discussion 1991). The left side of the brain is presented with a richer amount of brain nutrients than is the right side of the brain. Accordingly, the left side of the human brain consists of a much more knotty topology.
Broca-Wernicke in the left temporal region is implicated in the emergence of neurolinguistic activity. Left Occipital Lobe Area 17 and surrounding Area 18 is implicated in the emergence of visual mental representations. [click here for PET Image of this structure] In both linguistic and visual areas, if the associated cortex is not presented with adequate sensory stimulation during initial brain structural formation, there is a correspondent diminuition to complete lack of development of human sentient word/thought and visual pattern recognition capability later in life. This would suggest that there are critical early morphological conditions supporting neurocomputation and neurocommunication that consolidate into a binding network that produces sentient behavior.
Given that sentient behavior, to include a posteriori learning, can still be evidenced in the human brain after damage or dysfuntion of the left hemispheric region occurs, would suggest that the central nervous system (CNS) distributes learned information patterns throughout the entire brain structure. A lissajous-like self-similar dissemination of processed 1/f invariant sensory signal information from initial cortex receptor sites is posited.
Encoding discrimination of biologic sensory information is accomplished by quantum shift keying (QSK). QSK originates in the orchestrated reduction (OR) of quantum entanglement at specific electromagnetic resonating frequency locations in protein microtubulin in the neuropil. QSK is then communicated via oscillating and standing waves in the neurosynaptic - dendritic region. This resonating mode is either reinforced or reduced by related binding, non-binding activity in other regions of the brain. At certain frequency and energy thresholds, a combining resonance is established in brain function that binds the various oscillating brain subresonances into a cohesive, sentient pattern.
Crick (94) suggests that this combining resonance occurs when the brain enters into a special 40+ Hz binding frequency regime. There is evidence that sentient energy thresholds are significant, because there is a residue of human specific adenosine tri-phoshate (ATP) in the blood following cognitive (sentient) episodes. This residue does not appear in other animals and would suggest human specific thought processes. Binding processes also appear to cause morphological changes in the brain. The role of nitrogen molecule and crystalline H2O resonance is essential to the binding process. As the brain undergoes various stages of neuronal sprouting, consolidation and pruning, plasticity of the microtubulin provides the brain with the ability to adapt and codify useful sensory infomation signals into semi-permanent pathways.
Hameroff (90's) indicates that calpain is a primary neuromolecule that softens brain protein microtubulin (MT), which after a electromagnetic resonance wave interference pattern (holonomic) is presented onto the MT, the calpain is dissipated and a structural imprint of the QSK encoded wavefront interference pattern is thus captured in biologic protein structure. Sufficient memory storage mechanisms would be available in the brain to overcome state cycle limitations, since no synapto-dendritic region physically touches any other in the human brain. This establishes myriad number of switching pathways for random, but QSK coded, information patterns to be stored, with self-similar recall features in place. Access to any part of the lissajous-like distribution pattern would allow eventual reconstruction of the invariant information stored in holonomic memory. Internal stimulation of the resonant frequency modality or the actual physical bandwidth would provide the brain with internal memory recall capability. Cognitive recall is comprised of Gabor Functions in Hilbert Space.
Zero Point Energy - ZPE (Puthoff 89) could be the trigger effect in 1013-type MT providing the necessary resonant energy to overcome ATP thresholds, thus affording quantum entanglement options. In conjunction with either acidic or base bound, crystalline water (H2O), a 10 base MT becomes a resonating biocomputer in the electric portion of an electromagnetic field. A 13 base MT becomes a resonating biocomputer in the magnetic field. Because proteins (as strings) can reconfigure (conformal deformation - change shapes), a 1013 MT forms the basis of a very powerful 3-D biocomputational structure. Proteins can take shape around useful invariants extracted from frequency based information expressed in the electromagnetic field - learning.
Invariance can be captured in MT by quantum encryption of various combinations of photons, phonons and electrons, which may synergistically produce, via solitons, a binding property of emergent epiphenomenon, a biofield communication both local and non-local to the protein MT strings. Calpain induced start/stops in the dendritic-synaptic receptors, with varying degrees of glial cell neurochemical nutrient infusion, turn on or off the QSK coded learning sequences in the MT. As more and more of neuronal activity forms a topological geometry around these events, oscillating in concert, perceptual and then cognitive events transpire, suggesting a process for sensory to sentient computation.
Stapp (96) would argue an orchestrated reduction (OR) to a single quantum state. Prueitt (96), Globus (96), Norseen (96), and others would have a quantum entanglement that collapses not to a single state, but to a much more robust explosion (big bang) of quantum view. From this viewstate, the Crick, Pribram holonomic binding would provide a Penrose brain/mind the following biological choices in order to attend to the afferent sensory input; 1.) Select from the semiotic hypotheses generated, 2.) Prefrontal lobe induced noise to defer selection, and transfer of the hypothesis generation/selection to control of the anterior cingulate and other neuronal subtopologies for a Prigogine like epiphenomenon of emergence, or 3.) Symmetry break and ignore, measurement (Kugler 95) indicates release of the quantum enfoldment event.
Energy dissipation occurs in Modes 1 and 3. Quantum Shift Key (QSK) coding occurs via OR events to Modes 1 and 2 allowing for encoded memory-based recall processes. Non-cognitive attended symmetry and continued energy requirements are still afforded to Mode 2 - deferral, until a cognitive Mode 1 is achieved.
Globus discussions would indicate this is the principle of cybernetic loops in consciousness. Prueitt (96) would claim that initial memory is not required to initiate these processes, which suggests a basis for codelets as a basic QSK element to differentiate nature into groupings of natural kind. The human brain, without initial memory, can begin to learn by experiential and semiotic testing built around codelets, an original form of original kind strange attractor. If such trigger learning is successful in establishing QSK encoded memories, then regular neuronal learning mechanisms become dominant. In such fashion, the brain is capable of feeding itself critical information with, or without, memory as a necessary requirement.
Rough sets of similar information would share relatively common QSK cryptologic codes, and the presence of various categories of self-similar, reduced mathematical coefficient sets of natural codelets, may suggest a useful and powerful biologic mechanism to store and retrieve information efficiently - natural compression, decompaction.
2.0 THE SEMIOTIC PROCESS IN AREA L-17
The semiotic alphabet brain region correlated in function to Broca-Wernicke would be primarily the specific subtopology of the cerebral cortex in the left posterior occipital region, Area L-17. Surrounding Area 17 in both the left and right rear hemispheres of the brain is a different grouping of brain cells and neuronal pathways with connections to the rest of the brain - Area 18. Area 17 and Area 18 take visual information from the eyes and structurally perform a 2-D to 3-D semiotic conversion of objects in the field of view of the eyes into an internal mental representation of visual reality for dissemination to other regions of the brain (Kabrisky 66). Only three (3) genes control the human visual process. This indicates that substantial signal extraction and signal processing is involved in the human visual schema.
The direct neuronal sensory high fidelity input from the human fovea to Area 17 is greater in humans than any other species. This would indicate that the human visual semiotic 3-D mental representation is also greater than in other species.
There is also a significant amount of otherwise 'hard wired' as opposed to soft signal processing in the direct visual coupling into Area 17. Certain aspects of prosopopoeia, specific facial features indicating authority, and certain edge and top-bottom receptors, directly fire neuronal complexes in Area 17, as well as in the amygdala raising stress/anxiety reactions, and in the learned motor response complexes of the cerebellum. The combination of spectrum-based codelets and muscle contractions in the lense of the eyes are probably associated with the human homeostatic condition; for example: the pineal gland hormonal responses to whole spectrum natural light / brightness, such as implicated in the release of melatonin.
Area 17 and 18 interpret the images that the brain must respond to, deal with, that form the world of visual language, the semiotic languages that form our unique interaction with the world - the human personal visual signature. There are not thousands of images in the semiotic alphabet. There are not hundreds. Just as in Broca-Wernicke area where only about forty (40) sound types form the basis of culturally expressed language, there are a relatively small number of images in the visual semiotic alphabet. However, the combination and reconfiguration of this finite set is still able to produce the myriad complexity of mental representation producing creativity, insight, color, and dreams which form the basis of the human experience.
The human brain is actually many brains. Not only left and right, but front and back, top and bottom. And it is really many little brains sometimes acting (binding) as one, to cognate, to think, but many brain processes are acting without volitional cognition. It would seem that the great percentage of the human mental world is non-cognitive, and non-conscious, even unconscious.
Accordingly, there are many languages in the brain. Each brain language, to include emotions, would appear to have its own alphabet. The central thesis is on the finite set - the alphabet of images in the brain.
This image alphabet makes up a semiotic internal visualization of self-image and world reality that we call, 'us.' The visual enfoldment describes a relatively small, but consistent number of archetype images that the Brain/Central Nervous System must respond to and deal with for survival.
This is a powerful concept: That a handful of images can shape the self-identity of a person, a group, a society, a culture.
Vincent van Gogh cut off his left ear to give to a trollop, but his self-protrait perspective of the event portrayed a sliced up right ear. Even considering he was using a mirror to paint himself, he still transforms to the outside world observer the impression of destruction of an opposite form of himself.
Rather than the accepted interpretation that in some fit of rage, he was performing self-inflicted surgery to relieve an inner ear infection, could there really have been some hypersensitivity, some extreme antinomy, to van Gogh's Broca-Wernicke area, in that he was trying to silence internal voices, in a phase locked loop, that were compelling him in some tortuous semiotic malady?
That the reversed perspective of right and left is also expressed would indicate that van Gogh could have also had some combination of dysfunction in left Occipital Lobe Area 17, problems in the Area 18 3-D semiotic dispersion throughout the cerebral cortex, and/or disrupted intracollasal transfer in the corpus callosum. Depending on whether van Gogh painted with his right or left hand could also impune his cerebellum as an ironic contributor to the amazing agony expressed so passionately and beautifully in van Gogh's works of art.
Left Occipital Lobe Visual Area 17 and Semiotic Conversion Area 18 can also be considered likely candidate contributors to the dream induced prosopopoeia directly causing Robert Louis Stevenson's creative reconstruction of a reverie - an internal semiotic mental representamen: Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, perhaps also influenced by the effects of single blend, all malt scotch whiskey alcohol vapors in the nighttime air in the environs of Edinburgh University.
Area 17 and 18 could also be the semiotic trigger point for the nocturnal succuba visitation to Giuseppe Tartini in the 1700's, resulting in a pure musical orchestration crosslink in Broca-Wernicke area: the haunting Faustian sounds in Trillo del Diavolo, the Devil's Trill.
From what can be arguably ascribed as temporal lobe epilepsy that affected the visual and sound distortions in Alice in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll, to the selection by Goya, in Toledo, Spain, of the 'chosen' insane to pose as the portraitures of the Disciples touched by God, to many of the bizarre, to include metempsychotic, renderings of possessed artists, to the Deja Vu and Jamais Vu, and the many fold synergies of ergodic self-similarity expressed by Escher: the Hand of the Area 17, 18 semiotic process is at play.
The semiotic binding process across the cerebral cortex and deep down into the glial cells, the wellsprings feeding the information fields of the synapto-dendritic layers under control of fiefdoms and kingdoms of rival neuropils, picks and choses among competing 3-D mental representations in lissajous fashion. The semiotic down selection of Gabor Functions in Hilbert Space is the focus of attention characterized by an Einstein internally discerning mathematics, to the sweet memories of happiness down the perceived passage of time, clocked by the striatum in the basal ganglia.
Semiotic binding seems to work best when the brain is entrained between 7.83 Hz and 14 Hz, with special tunneling and neurochemical surges in the 9 to 10 Hz regime. The meditative Theta and modified Alpha-Theta states would appear to be the quiet zones where the ability to attend to internal mental representations can best be captured for reconstruction back through the efferent central nervous system pathways to show the world what floats in the mind. This delivery mechanism which brings forth creation back into the world in any number of newly reconfigured states (eolithic capacity) could be the semiotic description for the concepts in Richard Dawkins 1970's notion of 'The Building Blocks of Comprehension,' the Thought Memes, the Culturgen.
When such a semiotic process is flowing without difficulty, a state of grace, almost of not knowing, exists. However, noise and symmetry breaking and chaos is ever lurking in nature, if only to shatter the present to get to the future: To establish a new condition of test and survival.
Perhaps the tortured expression of a van Gogh is his attempt to return to a semiotic state of grace.
From Shakespeare, '...per chance to Dream.' If the semiotic process of binding creativity is evident in the dream Theta and meditative Alpha brain wave activity, and it appears to go on the fritz in the hyperactive Beta states, verging on out of control frenzied, phase locked loops and symmetry breaking madness bypassing 30 Hz, then what happens to the semiotic process in deep, deep sleep, the periods of seeming total non-conscious activity of Delta, and some comas, way down at 1 to 3, 4, 5 Hz? Humans enter this extremely dangerous twilight zone on average of three times per night, for about twenty minutes each. For one hour total each night, we slip the surely bonds of semiotics and lay prey to another's survival. Evidently, Delta sleep is involved with restoring the mental calibrations and nutrient stores necessary for sentient behavior.
The range of cognitive and non-cognitive control (lucid dreaming) of semiotic processes in some brain states and the inability to take telelogical advantage of semiotic processes in other brain states, to include chemical and electromagnetic induced entrainment, would suggest strongly that semiotic function is related to brain morphology and resonance.
When brain structure is put into a certain condition, semiotics occurs. As well, when brain structure is resonantly changed into another state, semiotics does not occur. Human brain structure can be shown to be significantly different is some neuronal subtopological regions than in any other species. Therefore, humans may engage in, due to their species specific brain structures resonating at certain brain frequency states, purely human semiotic experiences. These purely human semiotic experiences bind us not only as individual structurally different contributors, but as mutual individual participants to a common, larger human semiotic pool of information and creativity. If the human brain continues to evolve, and semiotics is critical to that evolution, then semiotic control will also continue to evolve.
Just as humans have developed machines as prosthetic devices to augment or outperform human function, then it would follow that initial emulation of semiotic processes in mental 3-D representation would be emplaced in machine logic. If internal to semiotic function is the innate ability to reconfigure information into new forms of perception, creativity, comprehension, and knowledge, then at some point in machine semiotic logic, machine semiotics could emerge in startingly different and dramatic fashion from human semiotics: This would signal a strict delineation, the Dawn of the Sentient Computational Era.
3.0 SEMIOTICS
Semiotics is the science of signs. The Peircian triadic form of semiotics involves combinations of Symbols, Indexes, and Icons, that form Signs (Ketner 96). Signs transform Objects from Reality into Mental Representations. Sentient activity is the process of transforming reality into mind for reconfiguration and the creative infusion back into reality. When humans dream, or create, or bring up images of faces of loved ones, or replay memories in the theater of mind, there is a utilization of Peircian triadic logic - a semiotic process.
Within the field of semiotics, the work of Charles Peirce would suggest avenues by which the logic of discovery employed by biological systems could be captured for insertion into machine logic and symbolic computation. If human eolithic semiotic processes are indeed related to algebraic topologies, structural geometries, and critical resonating information field frequencies, then advanced mathematics are required to accomodate the complex range of transformations necessary to synchronize human mental and machine logic interactions. The emerging mathematical investigations into Transfigural Mathematics (Shakunle 96) suggest avenues amenable for the conversion and transformation of human semiotics instantiated into machine semiotic processes.
The influence of Peirce's work in the late 1800's, recompiled by Dr. Burkes at Harvard in the 1940's and 50's, can be seen in the current investigations of John Holland, from the University of Michigan in EE/CS, now at the Sante Fe Institute. Holland is working on the next generation of Genetic Algorithms and Adaptive Complex Systems.
Semiotics stands to benefit from a robust interchange not only from standard scientific circles, but also from ideas and concepts and themes that come from non-standard scientific domains, even if controversial. There is a large body of useful insight to be gained from relooking historical, and contemporary, and even future assertions on the human condition that may not come neatly packaged in classic scientific wrapping.
A few of the seminal books that can guide the ongoing examination of semiotic mind and brain are:
Karl Pribram: 'Brain and Behavior'
Stuart Hameroff: 'Ultimate Computing'
Roger Penrose: 'Shadows of the Mind'
Dmitri Pospelov: 'Fantasy or Science'
Michael Hutchison: 'Mega Brain Power'
Also, Matthew Kabrisky: 'A Proposed Model for Visual Information Processing in the Human Brain.' The writings of Pennfield and Lashley, Ashby and Weiner, Persinger, Changeux and D'Arcy Thompson, and of D.L. Koruga, 'Neurocomputing and Consciousness,' set the stage for a growing network of accessible researchers, colleagues, and professional talent capable of developing methods and techniques that can tailor specific mind/brain semiotic-sentient solutions.
Recently, on 15 May 1996, Dr. Karl Pribram of the Radford University BRAINS Research Center, presented a masterful lecture at Georgetown University, in which he formulated an architecture for a 21st Century mind/brain multidisciplinary research paradigm, the title of which is: "The Deep and Surface Structures of Memory and Conscious Learning: Toward a 21st Century Model."
Pribram's model, in concert with the brain plasticity work in protein microtubulin of Stuart Hameroff, and in the quantum entanglement work with Roger Penrose, and others, serves as a solid baseline for continuing work by many different scientific research and development communities.
As the scientific community shifts to a virtual world of internetted, multidisciplinary electronic laboratories (E-Labs), the emergence of Images of Mind: The Semiotic Alphabet is part of an ongoing research and development program contained in the evolution of the Applied Para-Mechanics Lab (APL), which is mutually participating and supporting the maturation of the Sentient Machine Laboratory (SML).
Of note, the United States Air Force Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) report, "New World Vistas - 21st Century," commissioned by the Secretary of the Air Force and co-signed by the Chief of Staff (94), concluded in 1996, on pages 50 and 51 of the Executive Summary that:
'...Novel enhancements in Human-Machine Interaction...be aggressively pursued. The ultimate interaction is Thought Control.'
Semiotic based approaches are suggested for the next millenium control of Intelligent Systems, including Uninhabited Combat Aeronautical Vehicles.
Computational theorists forecast that over the next twenty years, the current generation of machine intelligence will rapidly flow toward Quantum computers, to Biologic computers, to Sentient computers in the year 2020. Such forecasts require fundamental breakthroughs in determining how the Human-Animal engages the processes of the Central Nervous System to achieve conscious and non-cognitive awareness. Just as the 'Double Helix' gave way to recombinant DNA of the human genome, the binding process of Human Thought may give way to bioelectromagnetic manipulation - unlocking the critical quantum resonances of human microtubulin in the neuropil, human brain frequencies, the keys to Consciousness, of Sentient Life, to alter reality.
4.0 ALPHABET OF IMAGES
Here is the alphabet of images that become the human visual language via the semiotic processes triggered in L-17/18. The brain deals with a set of images that form an alphabet for visual language.
The brain also uses a set of up to about forty (40) sound types to form our 'neurolinguistic' spoken languages. Accordingly, there appear to be other languages in the brain; for emotion, for kinesthetics, perhaps even for morality.
Each language is directly related to both specific and dispersed subregions of brain structure.
Brain structure, neuronal morphology, is extremely important. The interlinking of the various neuronal subtopologies and the associated mental 'semiotic' languages is what affords us our condition as 'human-animal' sentient beings. As we attend more or less to the different semiotic languages constantly reconfiguring the patterns in our brains, we communicate to ourselves internally and to others externally our sense of reality and purpose - our personal signature.
For verbal language, Broca-Wernicke on the left temporal side of the cerebrum is a critical structural region of the brain, taking sounds and dispersing the semiotic meanings throughout the lissajous-like distribution channels of the cortex. Not all sounds in the brain are implicated through the ears. Thermoelastic pressure waves from microwave pulsing, internal brain dysfunctions, the 'in-bandwidth' signal memory recall in dreams, and other forms of invasive and non-invasive aural hallucinations can make the brain sense and then perceive it is hearing real sounds.
For Images of the Mind: The Semiotic Alphabet brain region correlated in function to Broca-Wernicke would be primarily the specific subtopology of the cerebral cortex in the left posterior Occipital region, Area L-17.
Surrounding Area 17 in both the left and right rear hemispheres of the brain is a different grouping of brain cells and neuronal pathways with connections to the rest of the brain - Area 18.
Area 17 and 18 take visual information from the eyes and structurally perform a semiotic conversion of objects in the field of view of the eyes to an internal 3-D mental representation and interpretation of visual reality for dissemination to other regions of the brain.
A Visual Semiotic Poem:
The Human Brain is actually
many brains
Not only Left and Right
But Front and Back
Top and Bottom
And really many little brains
Sometimes acting (binding) as one
*To Cognate* - to think, but many brain processes
are acting without our volitional cognition.
In fact, the great percentage of our mental work
is non-cognitive, and non-conscious, even
unconscious.
Accordingly, there are many languages in the brain
Each brain language has its own alphabet
The central thesis of this poem-book will be on the
alphabet of images in the brain.
This alphabet makes up the internal visualization of
self-image and world reality that we call, 'us'
From the old religious proverb: "...To Name It is to Know It, to Possess the Power of It."
From a new semiotic proverb: "...To See It is to Know It, to Possess the Power of It."
4.1 EYES - GREEN
Green wavelengths are the baseline color of the 2-D to 3-D transformation of visual reality into the semiotic images of mind.
The eyes are an extension of the brain. Only three genes control the structural development of the human eyes, whereas thousands of genes orient the human olfactory sense/perceive neurology of smells. Such a limited number of genes suggests that the eye-brain interpretation and conversion of high bandwidth visual sensory data into mental representations is predominantly accomplished by signal processing activities that generate an extremely efficient signal to noise separation. Since images brought to mind, such as in dreaming, do not appear to contain any noise, suggests that the signal processing accomplished in the optical chiasmatic pathways culminating in Area 17 and Area 18 is a lossless compression-decompaction activity.
The eyes and the optic nerves are biologically configured to capture environmental information in the analog visual portion of the electromagnetic spectrum at roughly .4 to .7 micrometers (um) in wavelength. The highest concentration of photoreceptors at the Macula-Fovea, situated above the optic nerve, is directly centered in the green portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, 5.5+ um. The color green requires the least amount of signal feature extraction/processing energy expenditure in the human eye - brain.
From an evolutionary viewpoint, eye fatigue, and the associated sensory reduction of important visual information from the environment resulting from eye fatigue, would lead to a corresponding decrease in survival potential.
That the color green is the primary spectrum focused into the Macula-Fovea, indicates that the human eye-brain genetic structure evolved around an energy conserving process with respect to an environment dominated by the reflection of green wavelengths. For the human-eye brain, structured along an extremely efficient, energy conserving, noiseless signal extraction of useful environmental features, green is the baseline color.
The Macula-Fovea field of view is one to one directly connected and mapped into an exact 2-D topological map into Area 17 in the Occipital regions of the brain, with information passing through the hypothalamic and cerebellum regions. Area 18 is implicated in transforming Area 17 information into 3-D semiotic images for dispersion throughout the central nervous system.
Given that green is the primary color around which semiotic images of mind are formed, leads to the concept that different colors entering an energy conserving field of view will cause a change in the semiotic state. The change in the semiotic state requires an energy expenditure. Over time, the biological value to attend to or not attend to the different colors will become reinforced by survival and genetic factors.
However, for the individual human, structurally capable of sensing and perceiving the electromagnetic visual spectrum, the eye-brain will automatically adjust and respond to colorful objects presented onto a green baseline field of view.
When gazing onto a continuous field of green grass, the eye is immediately drawn to the white dash of a butterfly, or the bright yellow spot of a dandelion, or the sparkling glint of sunlight on a red reflective surface, or the standing shimmer of a rainbow.
There is more than color that causes a semiotic image in the mind. The eye also engages the following semiotic processes.
4.2 MOTION
The eyes engage three distinct but overlapping fields of view, basically a central focus, with left/right edges, and top/bottom thresholds. An object that crosses past any of these areas is detected by the eye-brain and causes instant cerebellum-efferent motor response without necessarily undergoing a complete optical-chiasma signal processing cycle. The eye can therefore instantly trigger a response without thought.
Various forms of motion are necessarily more alluring to the eye-brain. The flight direction of a butterfly is indicative of the most captivating form of motion. The highly variable trajectory of the flight of a butterfly causes the brain to constantly break and form and break symmetry (Kugler 92), engaging all three fields of view of the eye. There is an interesting potential connection in such forms of variable motion to the various payback schedules in gambling addictions, and the addictive process in the brain necessary to capture the focus of attention.
When the schema of payback is irregular, but with aperiodic large fluctuations, addictive processes are strongest. The other three schemas of lesser addictive process quality are; steady payback at lesser returns, steady payback at lesser returns with occasional large returns, and irregular, small returns.
Various forms of 'gambling' stategies may be reflected in how different species exhibit learning and memory interaction with the environment. Some animals, such as squirrels, rapidly forget where they buried large numbers of nuts, thus providing a rich chance for a new tree or food cache for another species. Some animals, such as squirrels under sudden, severe stress, lose all control over learned escape patterns due to the surge of neurochemicals in their brains. Sometimes this is good in that a pursuing predator can't get an edge up on catching the squirrel for food. But sometimes a squirrel in relative safety will unintentionally place itself in high risk situations, running back under a car.
There must be something in the presentation of certain forms of visual information to the eye-brain that causes such radical behavioral responses. Signal structure invariants is suggested as containing sufficient information to trigger such response modalities.
As information is presented to the eyes, certain invariant characteristics are contained in the signal processing stream that the species can genetically observe or can learn to detect. As the information passes through the retina and into the optical chiasmatic pathway, through the hippocampal region, in particular the amygdala, and into the cerebellum, where it is impressed on the cerebral cortex of Area 17 and Area 18, there exists the structural capacity for the central nervous system to act upon invariants at any time short of a complete visual saccade cycle, three times per second.
Indicated is the following: Certain parts of the brain, in particular the amygdala and the cerebellum, can detect invariant structures in visual information signals, prior to those signals reaching Area 17, and that invariants in visual informtion cause immediate non-cognitive CNS motor responses. The amygdala is closely associated with spawning anxiety and fear based cerebellum responses executed without volition via the efferent nervous pathways. Once a semiotic process is learned and disseminated to the cerebellum, or is contained as a genetically 'hard wired' response modality in the cerebellum, invariant trigger events in the information presented to the eye-brain will cause the CNS to automatically interact with the environment.
Equally, the eye-brain will also automatically respond to a sensed and falsely perceived - but not cognitively registered set of invariants. Just as we can swat at an annoying real bug that flys at our eyes, we can execute the same swat semiotically at a mental rendering of an annoying bug created due to the same invariants stored away or presented non-cognitively, or recalled as in dreams, or play-acting.
The learned patterns of response in the cerebellum directly feed into the efferent nervous pathways and 'automaton' like behavior can take place, which can account for drug-induced learning without volitional cognition, and can explain why an intoxicated person can still perform complex activities such as driving a car - without cognizant memory of the activity.
Other forms of motion that break lock and entrain the brain visually are spinning, the flowing of water, rolling motion - wheels of any kind, and explosions. Even apparent motion is sufficient to attract semiotic attention, such as the flicking of shadows when driving under overpasses. The edges of sunlight and shadow cause the eyes to blink and cause the same tensing of the efferent pathways as actual motion. Also, objects that loom small to large or zoom in large to small, which extend top or bottom out of our field of view cause semiotic change states and efferent tensing. Large shapes that suddenly emerge, clocks ticking, pendulums, even the images of falling objects can all trigger brain entrainment.
Different species set up different timing mechanisms to handle the biological significance to such breaking and resetting of attentional mechanisms, such as the striatum at the basal ganglia. Pidgeons for example rapidly bob their heads up and down in a physical enforcement to break lock with their environmental information streams of attention. In humans, the prefrontal lobes, primarily the left prefrontal, keep the attentional focus maintained. Rubbing the forehead is a form of physical manipulation to help the frontal lobe perform its function in maintaining symmetry and focus. A karate chop to the back of the neck, or the methodical rubbing of the base of the neck, are again various techniques to physically manipulate the release of adenosine to cause changes in brain frequency states, herein a reduction of brain activity toward Delta state unconsciousness or to a Theta state dreamlike trance.
4.3 DISTANCE: THE 30+ MILE TO INFINITY BASELINE
The eyes are fully capable of providing visual information into the brain resulting in either cognitive or non-cognitive central nervous system (CNS) patterns of behavioral response.
Underlying the CNS efferent motor pathway response effect must be certain triggers in the information flow from the eyes that causes non-volitional CNS efferent responses.
On a curve of distance versus mental image size, images approaching the grow only slightly larger in the eye-brain, until approximately one arm's length from the eye - then images grow rapidly until about one to two inches from the eye.
Structurally and via signal processing, images impact the brain dramatically within two to six feet of actual distance, or two feet to six feet of virtual semiotic distance.
Semiotic images of mind are contained in mental representations roughly equivalent to two inches to two to six feet.
The eye-brain uses minimal energy when staring at objects at long distances out to infinity, such as to the horizon at sea, or to a mountain off in the distance, which normally falls into a range of about 30+ miles.
Mountains and galaxies and the sun setting on the ocean's horizon would set up the distance energy baseline.
By presenting the eye-brain with distance information and then rapidly superpositioning information based on high semiotic content of two feet to two inches, entrains the brain in exactly the two optimal areas of the distance versus size curve by which the optical chiasmatic pathway is biologically structured in the human.
By simply combining the elements described in sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 established, very powerful visual semiotic entrainment or symmetry breaking techniques can be established for either cognitive or non-cognitive, invariant based, learned or autonomic behavioral patterns in humans.
For example: Information visualization presented to the eye-brain featuring a long, smooth vista of green grass, swaying and flowing toward a far off mountain would set the baseline. Then in quick succession, the flash of a light, the fluttering of a butterfly, and the super-imposition of a looming object, such as a large airplane, spinning or illuminated to the semiotic distance of two feet to two inches would probably capture most humans attention, causing them to mentally shift from what they were currently doing or thinking.
Given that human mental real estate doesn't allow for much polyphasic thinking, such an example demonstrates how the human semiotic process can be quickly captured and modified, and without conscious deliberation.
A nighttime information visualization equivalent could also be presented; wherein, the eye-brain is presented with moonlit expanses of water reaching out to the horizon, stars sparkling in the sky, fireflies blinking on and off at different rhythms, then total blackness, and the sudden eruption of a volcano, with red hot lava gushing and splurting, would also instantly occupy the human visual semiotic process.
4.4 PROSOPOPOEIA - FACES
In the visual saccade of the human eye, the eyes move from left to upper right in three staggered movements once a second. Rather than a continuous stream of visual information, the saccade results in three bursts of information sent from the eyes into the optical chiasmatic pathways to the left rear and right rear portions of the cerebrum.
Because of the high bandwidth of information in the pulses of visual sensory information from the eyes and the very limited amount of physical space to accomplish signal to noise separation in the ten inches or so from the eyes to Area 17, the eye-brain structurally manipulates visual information in order to accomplish the extraction of useful environmental features from the bandwidth.
Whereas the nose is very close to the olfactory receptor sites in the brain, an inch or two, as well as the ears are also very close physically to Broca-Wernicke area, a few inches at most, the eyes because of the bandwidth of information in the visual spectrum are at the furthest distance from Area 17 that they can be physically located. Still, the biological structure of the eye-brain must invert the visual signals to compensate for how the lens of the eye introduces spectral information onto the retinal surface, then diverts the visual information to the opposite side of the brain, all in order to gain additional signal to noise separation - time and spatial filtering of useful environmental features. The last bits of information presented during each left to right visual saccade motion occur in Area 17, the 2-D endpoint of the optical chiasmatic pathway.
In Area 17, noise is reduced, signal is enhanced, and an exact 2-D topological laydown of objects from the real world are put down in a map grid of exactly what the eye is sensing. Area 18 begins the conversion, using similar cerebral cortex structures to those found in Broca-Wernicke and other parts of the brain, of the 2-D information into the 3-D semiotic mental representations that then spread in lissajous-like dispersion patterns throughout the rest of the brain.
Of interest, the common biological structures found throughout the brain cortex result in different semiotic percepts - perceptions. Aural information and aural invariants in the signals sent from ear to Broca-Wernicke result in the perception of sound. The nose structures convert smell signals into the perceptions of smell. And, the biological computational structures in Area 17, common to smell and hearing structures, nonetheless convert visual information into the perception of sight. Obviously, there is something very important happening in the filtering of afferent information from the sensory modalities to the various subtopologies of the cerebral cortex - and this filtering appears to be affine stationary 1/f removal of noise and presentation of signal to biologic computional structures that are presupposed to receive such signals.
Basically, Area 17 is geared to receive preprocessed signals, not noise, to act upon with more signal processing - the semiotic process. Based on the nature of the frequency and amplitude and phase structure (e.g.- pulse repitition rate, etc.), the common brain computational structures, common semiotic processes, common electromagnetic memory, common mechanical protein reconfiguration memory storage and recall processes, common dispersion patterns, and other common components in the different subtopologies of the brain cortex, all nonetheless receive different signal invariants to work upon, thus producing the different perceptions that make up mind.
Common brain, common computational semiotic processes, act upon different signals to produce different perceptions. When brain binds the different semiotic perceptions into high harmonic 40+ Hz patterns, the synergistic effect is the mental theater of mind, in particular conscious mind. At different frequency levels, mind is altered, to the non-conscious Delta states at basic (non-harmonic) 3 to 5 Hz, the dream like and meditative states of Theta in the 7 to 9 Hz region, the alert wakeful states of Alpha in the 10 to 15 Hz, and the increasing frenetic to schizophrenic states of high Beta arousals in the 15+ Hz regime.
The signal from the eyes is preparing itself for the brain and the brain is presupposed by design to prepare itself for the signal. The importance here should not be understated.
The cerebral cortex is structured to receive useful signals by which to learn useful semiotic languages and patterns of usefully combined semiotic languages of mind. Receptor sites are established to receive these signals. The more signals, the more receptor sites are established in the brain in an addictive fashion. If signals do not arrive and bind, lock up, with the receptor sites, the receptor sites send out neurochemicals to orient the brain sensory modalities to provide signals. If real signals from the environment are not sent to the receptor sites, then semiotic based signals from the mind are sent to the receptor site. In this way, the brain feeds its addictive process with either real environmental signals or learned semiotic signals.
When the entire brain is listening to silence or looking at nothing specific, but is cued to some expected event, the entire outer periphery of the cortex is very electroencephalograph (EEG) and positron emission transmission (PET) active, all sensors and semiotic processes on alert. If nothing happens, the brain over time will begin to shift from this original EEG - PET status into a different semiotic based pattern of closure. The brain tries to complete patterns with external or internal information.
If the environment doesn't provide a pattern, the mind will construct one in an attempt to enfold the event as a learned activity.
The ability to measure learning is simple. Monitor the cerebral cortex signal to noise information time delay during a learning cycle. As the brain is learning, the right side is bouncing information via the corpus callosum to the left side and vice versa. The process is time consuming in the formation of semiotic languages and takes on the order of 100 to several hundred milliseconds.
Once learning is accomplished and the semiotic language associated with the learning is disseminated from the cortex into the cerebellum and efferent motor pathways, the timing and the orientation of the brain shifts dramatically.
Learned pathways from the right side of the cerebellum control the right side of the body and the left cerebellum controls the left side of the body. This shift from the bicameral mind to cerebellum based brain output results in efferent responses less than 100 milliseconds. Learning left to right and right to left uses up precious survival time. Learned events execute faster, and restore survival time. The brain is an addictive cycle of learning to learn to secure precious survival response time.
Once learning occurs in an EM field pattern or conformational change, a QSK registration takes place, establishing identification with a unique quantum code for further semiotic or cerebellum output actuation.
By analogy, the afferent nervous pathway to the brain is high fidelity fiber optics providing a rich infusion of reduced noise, lossless signal input into the cortex. The cerebral cortex takes the rich invariants (codelets) of the afferent system and transforms the information into 3-D semiotic alphabets, which form semiotic languages in the brain, which bind together to form mind.
Continuing with the analogy, the efferent motor pathway from the cerebellum, while faster in execution than the afferent brain learning process, is not made up of high fidelity fiber optic - like material; rather, the efferent system is much more like cheap twisted pair copper wiring, highly error prone.
The output of learning is to place mind and brain back into a system that by structural composition is error prone. In bizarre evolutional fashion, the mental output of humans introduces error that necessarily causes the next round of addictive afferent input to resolve the error. If humans were just simply such an example of a closed-loop or even double loop closed cybernetic system, then over time consistent patterns of behavior would emerge that would mark an eventual non-survival, end-game potential.
The human brain gets out of this eventual evolutionary trap of closed loop cybernetics through the semiotic-based process of "Feedforward" anticipatory strategies.
The ability to construct mental variations of QSK coded semiotic images allows humans to project into the future and learn future memories and the consequences of those future events, and store them away for future use. The QSK is important in that this is how humans can predict likely events, and discriminate between past real memory, dream memory, noetic memory, in process learning memory, and all the variations in between. When there are structural problems in the instantiation of QSK or when QSK coding is very similar across memories, then such perceptual defaults such as deja vu, deja reve, arrive, pense, connu, dit, eprouve, fait, goute, lu, su, voulu, visite, vecu, senti, parle, pressenti, raconte, rencontre, et al can occur.
The ability for humans to look into a 3-D semiotic future provides a virtual capability to alter reality, in an eolithic fashion, reconfigure patterns, learn the results, and then draw conclusions and the consequences of future action of the mind back down into the brain for execution versus information derived from the environment. Such a semiotic capacity dictates a huge evolutionary advantage. Humans possess the highest degree of fidelity Macula-Fovea to Area 17 signal extraction in the animal kingdom.
In combination, the prefrontal lobes and the anterior cingulate, override cerebellum and other cortex downselection processes. They are implicated in the ability to maintain the focus of attention to internal mental semiotic musing of the eolithic future, versus constantly attending to a past induced present. As a result, the brain-mind is freed to look into the future and "Feedforward" useful information to understand the past and prepare for the future.
With more than fifty percent of the human neurology dedicated to hand-eye coordination, Area 17 and in particular left Area 17 plays a great semiotic role in the ability of humans to make and reconfigure tools that can quickly dominate a planet, as opposed to the information capacity of other species.
Certain nitrogen-based molecules introduced into the bloodstream that navigate past the blood-brain barrier excite the semiotic process in humans, from substances such as caffein, nicotine, heroin and cocaine and red meats. Other nitrogen interacting chemicals cause a shift in semiotic processes and QSK coding processes of past, present and future memories. These chemicals are, for example, found in morphine, codeine, opium, alcohol and tryptophan. The myriad numbers of receptor specific neurochemicals and hormones internally produced in the human brain, dopamine, serotonin, melatonin, adenosine, calpain, endorphins, acetylcholine, etc. are all fine tuning the semiotic processes of addictive learning and memory and error correction and feedforward processes of the human brain-mind.
Not surprisingly, the primary molecules that biocomputationally combine to produce human mental activity are those primarily found in air and water interacting with carbon - crystalline H2O, and Nitrogen, electromagnetically resonating with protein microtubulin in the glial cell rich domain of the neuropil. Neuropil synapto-dendritic regions never physically connect, thereby producing an extremely intricate 3-D biological computational structure.
The 3-D biological computer in the protective skull casing of the human can naturally only continue to enlarge in the area directly beneath the soft spot in the skull plates of human infants.
The area of the brain under this part of the skull is the anterior cingulate, implicated in the ability to focus the brain-mind on "Feedforward" semiotic processes. The human infant brain sprouts neuronal clusters at an amazing, mostly Delta and Theta state, where upwards of 100,000 interneuronal connections are laid down every minute in the ninth month prenatal to several years of age. The first few years of life are crucial to the structural capacity of the brain to carry out semiotic processes of mind later in life. Just as the eyes are not engaged in a continuous process of information gathering, but are engaged in bursts of information gathering and interpretation, the human brain also undergoes various bursts of neuronal sprouting, consolidation and pruning throughout life. Much of Piaget's observations about the maturation cycle of children can be linked to brain surges in interneuronal capacity.
Since human mental output is error prone, and human infants take years to fully develop the structural capacity for complete semiotic functioning, there would be an evolutionary advantage for older humans to teach and help shape the error correcting potential of replacement infants. Whereas not all older humans would have the same amount of evolutionary interest in the previous statement, infants would be at an advantage to more closely interact with those older humans willing to share learned semiotic knowledge.
Because the Macula-Fovea of an infant is not quite ready to lay down a green baseline 2-D map into Area 17, the first sights of human infants are in the near and far reds of the area of the retina below the optic nerve.
The first neurolinguistic pattern of Broca-Wernicke that an infant can induce is the enfoldment pursing of the lips into an 'M' sound to suck and draw nutrients into the mouth. The vibration and warmth sensory modalities of the human infant are also at play.
Given this, the proto-semiotic world of the human infant is one of more or less integrated hues of red, warmth, sucking, genital motion, smooth shapes and specific hard wired smells. As human infants begin to focus their eyesight, the visual world of Area 17 fills with the meaningfulness of faces, some useful, others not useful. Therefore, the first real complete visual interaction with human culture, as part of the environment, is when the human infant begins to develop extended semiotic processes by visual processing of human and other faces at a distance of two to six inches to two to six feet. The ability to extract which human facial characteristics mean what, such as laughing, crying, talking, eating, yelling are all extremely important evolutionary critical feature extractions.
The Area 17 eidetic memories are established in the human infant significantly before the full neurolinguistic memory functions of Broca-Wernicke. Therefore, Area 17 is essential to human cultural development.
Prosopopoeia is the Greek word for the ability to call up human/other faces to derive useful information about the future. Prosopopoeia emanates from Area 17 and Area 18, and is triggered primarily in left Area 17 as a result of the final information laydown of the visual saccade. When humans want to recall faces and images of loved ones, such as a mother or a favorite pet, a gentle massaging or tapping of the area behind the left ear, closing of the eyes, and the act of rolling the eyes up and to the right is often sufficient to trigger the internal focus and the recall of the desired visage. Even as certain facial images are removed from the actual field of view, there is a continuation of neuronal firing in the region of Areas 17 and 18, indicating that there is some degree of hard wiring to accomodate the immediate and prolonged processing of facial invariants, suggested as 'authoritative' invariants. Such invariants are genetically encoded into Area 17 to alert the semiotic processes that they are about to receive an environmentally significant signal.
Donchin's work in the mid-80's on P-300, and a series of other facial pattern recognition cueing events in the human brain, further indicated that human interaction with faces, prosopopoeia, is an important mental activity for survival. Prosopopoeia also includes the recall of faces in dreams and other altered brain states. Accordingly, in the semiotic alphabet, prosopopoeia is part of both hard wired recognition and plastic signal processing reconfiguration in the human visual semiotic language.
Showing faces to humans must elicit a semiotic response. The virtual reality introduction of stimuli of invariant human facial signal characteristics into Area 17 must also elicit a semiotic response. Perhaps this is what occurs when certain invariants contained in the optical-chiasmatic pathway pass by the thalamus and excite the anxiety/fear complex of the amygdala, automatically releasing adrenaline in preparation for a 'flee-fight' cerebellum response to certain faces. Or for other faces, the invariants stimulate a release of pleasure inducing responses. By simply raising the right eyebrow for an extended moment or two, pleasure thoughts can be stimulated. Equally, by simply raising the left eyebrow for an extra moment, can stimulate the semiotic process into feeling of sadness and memories of depression.
Stimulation of Area 17, and in particular of left Area 17, causes picture-like memories to be elicited. The triggering point in left Area 17 is also coupled to dream instantiation. There is no noise in dreams because the dream is in the bandwidth of the memory that is QSK coded. Dreams are 100% clarity.
Simply massaging the left rear of the head and a little massage to the forehead can help the semiotic process of visualizing a face or memory of pictures - when the picture comes into internal view, the mannerisms of massage automatically cease. The picture is brought forth by a common binding process across the brain. An affect of the binding process, especially if disparate regions of the brain are involved at various geometries on different sides of the corpus callosum is laughter. When semiotic information in one part of the geometry does not conform to the information in the other part of the geometry on the other side of the corpus callosum, and when the intracollasal transfer finally confirms that latter information from one geometry is more 'true' than prior information is from the other geometry, the result is "laughter" - "a sneeze of thought." The bigger the diverse brain coupling when truth emerges, the bigger the laugh, from a chuckle to a rolling, lingering, boisterous series of guffaws.
4.5 ANTINOMY - THE BASIC STRUCTURE OF BRAIN-MIND
From the saying, "...Two heads are better than one:" - The brain is full of 'two heads' combining to make a semiotic decision. In the prefrontal lobe, the left side sends signals the mind interprets as pleasure and happiness, and the entire left temporal side of the brain is filled with neurochemicals that make humans feel good. The right frontal lobe, on the other hand, sends signals that indicate human life is sad and depressed.
Every 90 to 120 minutes either the left hemisphere or the right hemisphere of the brain is dominating resonant brain frequency events, as indicated by EEG's and PET scans. The left human nostril opens just a bit more to feed in a little more oxygen when the right hemisphere is dominant. The right nostril opens just a bit more when the left side takes over. At various times during the day and in sleep, both sides of the brain slip into synchrony with each other and quiet, restful behavior patterns result. Otherwise, in periods of asymmetrical brain activity, there are fitful tossing and turning in sleep and nervous mannerisms in wakeful pursuits.
Antinomy, from the Greek word for antagonistic forces that together produce a mutually beneficial result - a positive synergy, seems to be expressed in the structure of the human brain. The human brain seems to use antinomy in brain structure to perform a measurement on reality.
Based on blood flow and knotty neuronal topology nutrient capture, the addictive left side of the human brain gets rewarded first with receptors locked up and pleasure feedback neurochemicals released into the left temporal somesthetic portion of the brain.
However, the addictive right side of the brain receives lesser amounts of blood nutrients, such that the non-verbal right side of the brain, with many receptors unlocked releases neurochemicals indicating more external sensory stimulus, or more semiotic internal stimulus to satisfy addictive requirements for learning.
Thus, a very interesting measurement duel is established with a knotty 3-D left biological computational structure, capable of expressing itself in neurolinguistic patterns, and full of "feel good" chemicals like oxytocin, surging along dealing with reality, in conflict with a smooth 3-D right biological computational structure, not so fully capable of neurolinguistic expression, oozing with "feel bad" chemicals, making due with semiotic virtual images of reality - the result is pure computational antinomy, the basis of sentient computing.
The development of the corpus callosum structurally allows both sides of the brain to communicate with each other. But in the human species, the amount of intercollasal transfer bundling is subject to sexual dimorphism - in which males and females statistically emerge with more or less, males having on average, less bilateral symmetry and less efficient coupling in the intercollasal transfer mechanism.
For every action a human makes or thought a human thinks, a dual axis, and even a three axis scalar, computational process is actuated. Sometimes a longer intercollasal learning is better, sometimes a shorter lopsided learning pattern is better. In either case, the better result gets sent into the cerebellum for future control of the same side hemisphere. Actually, the basic dual antinomy computer of the cerebral cortex downloads into the more machine like, serial/parallel computation of the cerebellum. The human actually operates with what appears to be up to a three axis computational process. The X, Y antinomy establishes basic measurement and the scalar axis, Z, provides additional sentient, holonomic measurement of self.
4.6 ERGODICITY AND NON-LINEAR CHAOS
As the human eyes visually saccade from lower left to upper right, what is being observed in left occipital Area 17 is three bursts of non-linear behavior per second superposed on time-transient behavior, that results in ordered patterns that evolve in time. The transient behavior is eliminated as the eyes reach the upper right portion of the visual saccade, leaving only strange attractors and deterministic chaos to winnow out during the chiasmatic pathway, for semiotic introduction to Area 17, and semiotic conversions and transformations in surrounding Area 18.
Whereas most self-similar patterns are consistent, ergodically, over different scalar transformations, there are other non-linear patterns that become consistent only at different ergodic scales. In essence, there are forms of non-linear ergodicity that evolve from focus at certain scalar transformations into chaos at the next transformation, and then back into focus at another scalar pattern.
Semiotic differences in species could not only be related to portions of the electromagnetic spectrum undergoing cortical sensory transformation, but also in the scalar focus/chaos coding of patterns of sensory information. For instance, what if Neanderthal and Cro-Magnon both interacted with the environment with basically the same brain computational functions, with Neanderthal possessing a larger overall cranium capacity, but the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum sensed by their eyes and the ergodicity self-similarity of their focus/chaos coding were different.
If Cro-Magnon came out with a Macula-Fovea in the green spectrum, sending deterministically chaotic strange attractors signals over a optical chiasmatic pathway into an isomorphic left Area 17 for 2-D point to point connections, that would serve to feed focus coded 3-D visual semiotic information into Area 18 for dissemination and binding with other focus semiotic languages throughout the cerebral cortex, then Cro-Magnon would have an extremely competent evolutionary mechanism to 'Feedforward' future mental images of the consequences of eolithic toolmaking and reconfigurations of information, even if the energy and brain frequency requirements and information signal processing would require Cro-Magnon to sleep upwards of 20 minutes a day, three times a day, in a deep Delta state, almost completely incapable of conscious self-defense.
If Neanderthal on the other hand, physically stronger and with a larger overall brain, came out with eyes and an optical chiasmatic pathway that registered slightly different electromagnetic spectrum onto an Area 17 with a focus coding more chaotically cloudy, then the ability for clear 3-D 'feedforward' semiotic mental representations and reconfigurations would be lessened, with an accompanying lesser evolutionary skill. Different semiotic scalar transformations suggests that Cro-Magnon and Neanderthal could communicate with each other, even understand each other, but in cloudy terms and mostly with respect to the present and past, not necessarily the future, or in moral implications of future action.
As implicated in Julian Jaynes, 'Origins of Consciousness of the Bicameral Mind,' perhaps the dawn of Homo Sapiens and of present day Humans, is the emergence of different mental coding (QSK) in the scales of focus and chaos across the ergodic self-similarity, deterministic chaos and strange attractors/invariance common in biologic computational structures.
For all the strength and brain size and even burial rights of Neaderthal, perhaps shortfalls in scalar focus and feedforward semiotics and the ability to conduct internal future moral considerations took a natural evolutionary toll and prevented species continuation. Maybe Neanderthal's Area 17 didn't exist, or only partially so, because of different blood flow and nutrient absorption coefficients in the brain.
ALPHABET OF IMAGES:
Motion: Spinning, Explosions, Fluttering, Floating, Falling, etc.
Distance
Lines
Holes, the Ground
Antinomy: Measuring Smoothness versus Roughness
Eyes Green: Early Eyes Red
Size: Largeness - Smallness
Blood - Meat
Sex
Shadows
Time
Temperature
Star - Sky Patterns
Bright Colors
Children - Ages
Prosospopoeia - Faces
Novelty - Oddity
Foggy - Clear
Vibration - Rhythms - Pulsating
Water
Stillness - Quiet
Tunnels
Fire
Death
Authority
Branching Trees
God
Flag
Treasure
Eyes
Hands
Groups Less Than Twenty
Noise/Error, Resets
All of these items reinforce each other and often merge in tuples and triplets. Many of these topics can be considered subsets of other topics, which could shorten the list, and additional versions could probably be supplied, slightly increasing the list, but roughly the same number of visual signs and symbols (semiotics) exist to combine to portray and recreate reality in visual language as does the spoken alphabets to create a neurolinguistic representation and description of the world - 20 to 40 components make up languages, influencing and heavily influenced by cultural modifications.
Just as we do not increase the number of sound types in our Broca-Wernicke area as we age, we also do not increase the number of images in our Area 17 computations. We may become more or less aware of our spoken and visual languages, but we do not structurally increase the computational components underlying the languages. However, just as recombinant DNA can introduce more complex coding sequences into new life forms, there should be no reason why recombinant Semiotic coding could not emerge to give us a larger Broca-Wernicke or Area 17 semiotic language capacity.
Sentient machine language could conceivably host spoken and visual semiotics that exceed the human electromagnetic and focus-chaos (QSK) limitations currently expressed in biologic computational structures, perhaps much in the same manner as Cro-Magnon to Neaderthal.
Here is a sample of some of the underlying brain structure and function for a few of the items in the Semiotic Alphabet: Images of Mind.
Motion, Distance, Eyes (green and red), Size, Shadows and Prosopopeia - Faces, Authority receive in depth coverage in other sections.
Lines that appear straight cause a Macula-Fovea focus indicative of human activity, as opposed to the more non-linear, curvilinear activity of other species biological computational activity. Non-biological processes, such as earth-chemical processes, can produce remarkable artifacts in nature, to include straight lines and geometries that otherwise would appear to be formed by human activity, and can fool the human visual process.
Nonetheless, converging and diverging lines also impact Area 17 and subsequent Area 18 semiotic processes related to interpretation and pattern development.
In the presence of alternating electromagnetic fields placed on the right and left temporal regions of the human brain, series of lines and orthogonal crosses and rotating x-shaped patterns are perceived, to include associated sensations/perceptions of time elongation, to extreme situations of 'no time' and a complete 'end of test pattern' shut down effect, where the person completely shuts down internal visualization and time awareness.
That lines and patterns of lines can dramatically affect human behavior is indicative of a very strong semiotic basis in the transformation of lines and strings (String Theory) into much more complex mental visual representations. Human soft wired signal processing of line patterns and associated geometries appears to go much farther in semiotic predictive reconfiguration of 'feedforward' future realities than in any other species. In other animals, crossing lines and edge penetrations result in very specific hard wired behavioral responses, whereas in humans, it appears that semiotic manipulation of lines gives us the capacity to learn and test predictive locations and geometries on future patterns for QSK storage for future recall and application to present and past pattern utilization.
Because more than 50% of human neuronal circuitry is dedicated to Hand-Eye coordination, humans spend a lot of quality time observing, mostly non-cognitively, own and others hands and eyes. Hands and eyes are critically important to efficient human semiotic internal representations. Just as the human tongue moves in the mouth to physcially map out neurolinguistic patterns in speech and word related movement, the hands and eyes also trace out 3-D patterns to physcially represent or physically stimulate internal human semiotic visual patterns. Hand - Eye gesticulation is an efferent loop, showcasing what is going on internal to the mind.
Hand - Eye gesticulation is also providing afferent error control feedback loop information back into the semiotic pattern testing of reality taking place in Area 17 and Area 18.
On earth in the presence of gravity, the human eyes are normally looking out and down, not up, and mostly down, not out. Human eyes are normally looking down on the ground with some forward field of view. A strong evolutionary reason for such a configuration of the eyes is that Area 17 should be able to optimize the sensory search for food and or treasure.
Most food or treasure on earth is down and out. The eyes are remarkably able to spot odd or novel or learned objects in clutter, mostly ground place clutter. Put a twenty dollar bill in a dirty gutter with lots of non-valuable items and very soon a human eye will focus in, detect and cause a cerebellum response to pick up the money, or treasure or food.
Area 17 and Area 18 in the absense of legitimate sensory input will begin to manufacture semiotic patterns that reflect survival requirements; hence, the mirage, or the hallucination of food or money, etc. Borrowing a phrase from Field of Dreams, instead of build it and they will come, "...Dig a Hole, and Semiotics Will Come."
In the larger section on Antinomy, discussion indicates that the human brain is constantly comparing and contrasting, to include fusing diametrically opposed biologic computational outputs, in its internal semiotic pattern making, hypothesis generation, down selection and decision making deferral with support from the prefrontal lobes and anterior cingulate. That the human brain is capable of dealing with antinomy such as Smoothness and Roughness is not surprising. Human - made objects reflect a different fractal dimension of smoothness and roughness than naturally occuring objects. The human knotty topology of the left cerebral hemisphere is intricately capable of discerning roughness, down to fine filagree details, whereas the smoother computation of the less profligate right cerebral hemisphere dovetails quiet efficiently with the grace and flowing patterns of longer, less complex patterns.
The shifting signal processing of the human Macula - Fovea to the right and left occipital Areas 17 and 18 are natural extensions of fractal-wavelet (Gabor Function in Hilbert Space) estimators and trappers of self-similar ergodic invariants, strange attractors and deterministic chaotic boundaries. In essence, the human brain is a smoothness - roughness calculator using the corpus callosum as a measurement device combining the semiotic inputs of left and right Areas 17 and 18.
Again and again in the limited signal bandwidth, the precious real estate, of the human physical brain, the constant antinomy very often produces the following restrictions on human mental processing and cerebellum output. Humans get into conditions of phase lock loop in which the same state cycle limits of semiotic representation repeat and repeat and repeat, locking out other biological computations. At other times, constant noise and low threshold of input constantly keep the semiotic process from enfolding upon a down select mode, normally in a frenetic high Beta state of brain frequency, in which the molecular resonance in the brain is excessive, most likely in the nitrogen frequency regime, thus producing a hectic, confused semiotic initiation sequence.
Under normal mental conditions, the human brain seems most adept at starting with one end of the continuum of the semiotic antinomy process, such as smooth right hemispheric hand - eye drawing and carefully, precisely shifting to a controlled, detailed left hemispheric concentration, and then shifting scalar processes back again.
For instance it is very easy to use both hands to trace out detailed or smooth drawings, but much more difficult to assign semiotic bandwidth control to draw smooth with one hand and detailed with the other, without substantial training and practice.
The human brain would appear to be a measurement device between the opposite ends of an antinomy continuum, with a very high degree of precision in picking the intermediate invariants which depict reality, and then sending such invariants into semiotic 3-D mental transformations and feedforward pattern reconfigurations and test for potential use in human survival.
When the human eye - semiotic process is presented with large numbers of objects, semiotic processes begin to cluster and associate very quickly above numbers 10 to 20. Perhaps because the optic nerve is structured in such a way that the only two distances of optimal concern to Area 17 include 30 miles out to infinity and 2 inches to 6 feet, the brain processes are themselves optimized to deal with the likely numbers of objects in the field of view at these two distances. Accordingly, probably no more than 10 to 20 objects will populate at two inches, while extremely large numbers, such as myriad stars in a clear night sky will predominate the human field of view. Given that clustering and grouping are efficient forms of energy conversion, the Human Eye - Area 17/18 Semiotic complex probably deals with two sets of optimal numbers, small numbers and large number sets. Evidence of this is seen in asking people to recount how many objects they witnessed, which normally results in either an accurate number of recounted objects when the actual count falls below 10 to 20, or mistaken counting on the low side when numbers of objects greater than 20 begin to form into larger multiple sets of 50, or another form of mistaken counting where the recounted objects are much higher than the actual number of objects, such as claiming thousands when there where only hundreds.
The semiotics of survival is a most important area for representation and feedforward reconfiguration of Areas 17 and 18. The internal visualizations and forward consequences of Sex, and Temperature, and Death - God - Authority, and Fire, and Water, and Blood-Meat would contain tremendous implications for internal testing of the virtual, dreamlike, feedforward world of semiotics versus the learned, sighted observations of reality.
Children below the ages of three do not seem to possess a semiotic binding sense of the true significance of death, but they do seem to instinctively sense authority, as suggested in the section on prosopopoeia and some forms of authoritarian facial hard wiring associated in amygdala - cerebellum response to invariants in the information content flowing through the optical chiasmatic pathway.
Children's sense and perceptions of Life-Death-Morality-God-Authority seem to semiotically bind for the first time between the ages of 3 and 7, as Piaget would suggest, and again very closely related to recall functions of prosopopoeia. Patients interviewed after near death experiences repeatedly refer to seeing the faces of their loved ones, mothers and fathers, grandparents, at an age in life, and most often from the perspective from the waist up, as if from the early semiotic fusion memorys (QSK) as a child between the ages of 3 to 7. When the anterior cingulate is probed mechanically, human subjects also without exception, refer to elicited memories associated with love and morality and god and kindly authority figures and faces, suggesting that there are trigger spots in the Central Nervous System (CNS) for the elucidation of electromagnetic resonance memory (Sheldrake - 85) or mechanical protein consolidation (Eccles - 92), that are most likely disseminated via holonomic self-similar patterns throughout the brain/CNS field boundaries. People with brain frequencies entrained at 10 Hz frequencies also make many similar claims, to include the Pink or White Like sense of motion into and following a tunnel. Phosphene effects of externally induced flicker fusion and/or semiotic induced brain states may account for these experiences, but that they are part of human consciousness is important, because such powerful sensations/perceptions affect the potential survival role of the individual/culture, and should not be dismissed as extraneous brain/mind artifacts. Tunnels and faces and soothing white light may represent the most basic feedforward human semiotic condition, essential to our very sentient being - our initial semiotic binding, the semiotic trilogy of life.
Water and stillness also seem to capture human semiotic attention, causing a deferment over other mental activities. Fire and the Waving of a Flag and the internal vibration and rhythms associated with actual or semiotic Sex also appear to be major semiotic 'symbols of symbols,' from which other subordinate mental activities arise.
Temperature is important to humans and the fact that a shadow can convey information to Areas 17/18 of a semiotic location that means the difference between cooler life and overheated extinction is also a powerful semiotic symbol of symbols.
Returning to the theme of the brain as a measurement device between two ends of a semiotic continuum, in the domain from Clear to Fuzzy visual information, with specific Odd or Inverted or Reversed/Rotated Invariants, the semiotic discontinuities captured by the sensory input process to the brain appears to force the brain to produce a reason, to force a down select resolution of the semiotic problem, to deconflict the situation. Importantly, if sufficient noise is also entering the semiotic pathways from external or internal (prefrontal-anterior cingulate), (amygdala-cerebellum) sources, such that down selection can not occur, the brain could continue, non-cognitively, below just noticeable differences (jnd) at the sensation-perceptual interface threshold, to churn away semiotically, firing away unsuccessful pattern after unsuccessful pattern, thus tying up critical pattern recognition resources, in a non-conscious, yet still adaptive, open ended feedforward loop, with no effective survival closure and useful learning achieved.
In such a run away semiotic condition, there is great pattern development, but no practical survival implementation of the pattern.
Noise, the necessary explosion in the mind to break the previous symmetry lock and to induce a new set of semiotic options can be triggered in various ways.
From the saying, "...Eyes - windows to the soul:" - Research at the University of Washington, St. Louis would suggest that information passing through the anterior cingulate triggers in humans thoughts and feelings of soul - of connectedness to nature/universe. Information through the amygdala, nearby, arouses concerns, anxiety and fear. Information through the nucleus accumbens stimulates actions related to sexual impulses. Information through the hippocampal region elicits ranges of common and specific, often unrecalled memories, including rage - almost as if 'Cross-Talk' emerges when information signals in one area of the brain cross over and stimulate, entrain nearby areas.
Such binding action is also triggered and mediated from pre-frontal lobe neuronal firing patterns - with coherence through the entoerhinal areas. Importantly, only in humans do these brain substructures, in this structural geometry, exist. Importantly, only in humans do these structures, these neuronal subtopologies, operate within the nitrogen-molecule based neurotransmitter breakdown cycles. Importantly, human-like concepts of soul, right and wrong morality, ethics which appear to emmanate from the anterior cingulate region, can be biochemically superstimulated and eventually shunted by introduction of nitrogen laden chemicals such as nicotine, cocaine, caffein, morphine, heroin, etc., and probably from electromagnetic equivalents that can specifically stimulate brain nitrogen resonant frequencies.
The changes in oxygen-nitrogen levels associated with alcohol intoxication and reduced oxygen blood levels from other intoxicants modifies information flow through the anterior cingulate. When the anterior cingulate regulation of brain processes drops off line, then the other stimulated areas of memory and semotic cortex/CNS, e.g. rage, sexual impulse, fear, animal-like sensory/perception modalities become established as dominant over human behavior. The learned patterns of response in the cerebellum directly feed into the efferent nervous pathways and 'automaton - like' behavior takes place. Such processes can account for 'drug-induced' learning without volitional cognition, such as why an intoxicated person can still perform relatively complex activities equivalent to driving a car - without cognizant memory of the activity.
Voltaire, the prolific French writer is said to have consumed tens of cups of coffee to enter his frenzied state of capturing his internal word thoughts, estimated at 700 word thoughts per minute. Writing with both his right and left hands and dictating as well to a scribe, he kept up with his word thoughts.
He loved these sublime moments - pure '100% in the bandwidth' efferent neurolinguistic speech - whereas most humans engage in a stuttering neurolinguistic deselection process - choosing only 60 or so words per minute from 700 available.
The human semiotic thought/learning process appears to be addictive, once we start to do it, we do it all our lives. When we speak we are predisposed to hear, and when we hear we are predisposed to talk. Such oscillation of the Fibonacci - based coding sequence of the inner ear, the cochlea, is much the same coding sequence (QSK) of the nautilus and the basis of the floor plan of the Acropolis, the Greek Temple of Learning in Athens - nitrogen encryption/unlocking sequences that start the stimulation of the production of adenosine receptor sites in the brain. When we think and talk, adenosine is not present at the receptor sites. As we tire through the day and these sites need to replenish, adenosine from a gland at the back of the neck is released that locks up these sites, making them unavailable to us. When we drink coffee and ingest/interact with other nitrogen stimulating biochemicals/electromagnetic fields, our adaptive brain puts out new adenosine receptor sites. More receptor sites require more adenosine, which can only be produced at certain rates, therefore our brains get into a withdrawl situation where we can't shut off the thinking process. Rather than more thoughts being better quality, the net effect is run away less optimal learning thought processes. Falling asleep and dreaming in Theta is where some of the receptor sites are still open and partial direct channels of semiotic condition can occur, but in dreamlike, disconnected patterns. It appears that humans must undergo a full Delta state of very low frequency resonance to restore the normal learning addictive state, which can be quickly stimulated by nitrogen resonating sources. If Delta states and other restorative frequencies are not allowed to occur in humans, then a chronic, under efficient semiotic state is engendered. Just as run away suboptimal Broca-Wernicke word thought addictions can occur, it should also be possible to describe Imagery-Based Addiction, such as Pornography, in Areas 17-18.
Hopefully, the description of the Semiotic Alphabet: Images of Mind establishes that humans and human cultures clearly are extremely dependent on the 2-D transformation of visual sensory information from the eyes to Areas 17-18 internal 3-D semiotic representation for a feedforward test of reality in the human condition. Without this capacity, in conjunction with binding to Broca-Wernicke and other areas of the brain, we would not be human. Importantly, this capacity is subject to modification both internally and via external sources. Equally, this capacity of the brain is not necessarily fixed and can be extended, augmented or transferred to machine based sentient computing requirements of the 21st Century.
4.7 BRANCHING TREES - THE SIGN OF BRAIN
The image of a broad, branching oak tree is a fitting semiotic sign for the wonderful complexity of the brain-mind, emerging out of less complex, yet self-similar, common structural components. Just as the eyes, as windows to the soul, feed the rich spectrum of colors into the brain to paint and massage the human condition, the branching tree represents how the brain draws upon, feeds and breathes out information anew. Much like a colorful coral reef, the tree-like brain is immersed in a sphere of information. The brain extracts and then enfolds selected information into new patterns to test and alter the world.
Just as trees rise from the ground to follow the sun, the brain rises up following the direction of tiny pieces of magnetite in special cells and areas of the brain to seek out important information from earth's electromagnetic fields. Just as trees sprout new fractal segments in search of nutrients, the brain sprouts self-similar bits of itself in the search for new information combinations. Trees begin to consolidate their growth patterns and focus in on fruitful sources of water and sunlight. The brain also consolidates and reinforces those neuronal regions, those neuropil locations, that provide the most useful real world or internally semiotic generated information. And the brain, as in trees, enters stages of pruning, regeneration, and the eventual stage of final pruning - natural down selection.
The insides of trees are full of long strings of plastic material that help a tree reconfigure itself to the vagaries of natural events. The insides of brains are full of long strings of plastic protein microtubulins that help a brain not only reconfigure itself based on extracted signals from the environment, but can out do a tree, in the sentient, eolithic ability to feedforward, assess, test and learn about the future, semiotically, in order to reconfigure itself to better extract and enfold upon information from the environment.
Trees consist of the elements of nature. The human brain thinks as the result of the correct assemblage of cells containing bound water in crytalline form, some slightly acidic, some slightly base, and the resonating frequency of nitrogen in a carbon-hydrogen lattice. Just as trees stand alone and in forests, human brains also stand alone and in cultures sharing common mental activities - human brain subtopologies bind into purposeful cohesive patterns of attention and focus. Human cultures bind into purposeful patterns of behavior.
Trees however do not engage in active cognitive antinomy, they do not measure themselves against themselves or against other trees beyond the struggle for imposed cybernetic and mathematical control and use of resources in natural selection. Humans are different than trees in that humans can turn on the antinomy, humans can observe their own mental states and those of others and make constant cognitive, and, most of the time, non-cognitive measurements of the holonomic, semiotic processes of the brain.
The brain, the coral reef of humans, is full of rich colors that reflect the tremendous variety of signals upon which we can extract and shape our future. The tree is the land based version of the coral reef, the arboreal home for the eventual sprouting, consolidation, pruning - the semiotic interlocution - of the human brain, engaged in biologic sentient pursuits.
Just as the coral reef saw the emergence of the trees on land, and trees saw the emergence of man upon the world, man is now at the juncture, the era, where semiotic processes will at first link up with machine intelligence in mutual augmentation. Then next, set free, emulated quantum-biologic-sentient forces can pursue totally new vistas of information reconfiguration - new patterns of life.
5.0 GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS
Antinomy - opposing actions, to include diametrically opposed elements,
that synergistically merge to produce useful measurement results
to the system
Afferent - information signals coming into the brain from the senses or other
mechanisms
Efferent - information signals emmanating out of the central nervous system
(CNS)
Neurolinguistics - brain structure related to language
Neuropil - brain structure encompassing the junction of dendrites, synapses,
glial cells, and microtubulin
Glial Cells - connective cells in the brain that also provide a rich source of
neurochemicals to the brain, in particular the neuropil
Microtubulin - strings of proteins that form complex biocommunication
networks in the brain, whose infrastructure is reconfigurable
Nucleus Accumbens - brain structure related to sexual differentiation
Cerebrum - large portion of the brain including the left and right hemispheres,
involving the frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital lobes
Cerebellum - large brain structure complex at the rear base of the skull,
connected to the spinal cord and the cerebrum
Cortex - the outer portion of the main body of the brain
Intracollasal - the transfer exchange of information between the right and left
hemispheres of the brain through the corpus callosum
Broca-Wernicke - complex of brain structure on the left side of the head
involved with the neurolinguistics of words and speech
Optical Chiasma - the structures from the eyes to the back of the brain involved
with the processing of human visual information
Macula-Fovea - the structures in the eyes that focus highly detailed human
visual information signals for transmission to occipital areas 17
Pre-Frontal Lobe - complex of brain structure just under the forehead involved
with the focus of attention
Parietal Lobe - complex of brain structure in the top middle of the brain involved
with the afferent and efferent nervous pathways of the somesthetic
region
Anterior Cingulate - brain structure in the forward top center of the brain
implicated in attentional control
Amygdala - brain structure nodules in the midcenter of the brain, closely
connected with the hippocampus and involved with control of
memories, anxieties, fears and impulses
Hippocampus - seahorse/shoe shaped brain structure in the midcenter of the
brain involved with control of emotions and memories
Temporal Lobes - complex of brain structure on either side of the head
implicated in a wide range of left side feelings of happiness
and right side sadness and depression
Occipital Areas 17 - brain structures in the left and right rear portion of the
cerebrum involved with the two-dimensional (2-D) retinal
transformation of vision into three-dimensional (3-D)
mental representations (semiotics)
Occipatal Area 18 - brain structures immediately surrounding Areas 17 in both
the left and right occipital lobes involved with the 3-D
semiotic process of human visual sensory information
dispersion via lissajous-like dissemination patterns
throughout the CNS
Striatum - brain structure near the basal ganglia related to biological timing
processes
Lissajous - conversion of a stream of information into a dispersed, but
tractable, pattern
Ergodic - self-similar in that any portion of the whole represents
significantly the entire whole
Invariants - something which is seen to be the same from different
observations
Semiotics - the science of signs and symbols capable of representing,
reconfiguring and recalling simple and complex groupings of
ergodic, invariant elements
Gabor Functions in Hilbert Space -
a mathematical representation of specific information/signal processing
indicative of what appears to occur in the human brain during semiotic -
sentient activity, related closely with Shannon's Law and a family of
self-similar transformations, such as Fractals, Wavelets, and Codelets
Sentient - containing the power of perception from the senses, but includes
also cognitive and non-cognitive sensation/perception, and the
ability to semiotically, eolithically, rearrange information for
feedforward, open loop, future predictive test and learning
Eolithic - teleological use of, formation and reconfiguration of tools
Teleology - purposeful behavior related to goals
Holonomic - the brain as a measurement of the entire/whole sentient being
Epiphenomenon - that which emerges out of existing phenomenon
Prosopopoeia - personification of inanimate things, the recall of faces
Metempsychosis - the transmigration of the soul into another animal or human
S:N - signal to noise ratio, where semiotic processes, such as dreams, remove
all noise, providing recall in the bandwidth of pure signals
MT - microtubulin, where the majority of human brain microtubulin is form 1013,
in which the 10 portion interacts with electric portions of electromagnetic
fields (EMF), and the 13 portion interacts with the magnetic component of
EMF's.
CNS - central nervous system
QSK - quantum shift key, suggested as the cryptologic encoding/decoding
process occurring during orchestrated reduction (OR) of quantum
entanglement in the MT at the neuropil during sentient activity
ZPE - zero point energy, (casimir effect), suggested as the initial energy
trigger from the natural environment to begin OR in the MT at the
neuropil
PET - positron emission tomography, provides real time non-invasive
monitoring of brain function
EEG - electroencephalogram, measures electrical activity in the brain
1/f - 1 over the frequency
Hz - hertz, cycles per second
OR - orchestrated reduction is a quantum wave collapse in which quantum
selection, rejection or deferral occurs in the MT of the neuropil
Brain States - Beta (15 - 50+ Hz), very active to manic to schizophrenic
Alpha (9/10 - 15 Hz), wakeful, alert, composed
Theta (5/6 - 9/10 Hz), dreaming, meditative
Delta (1 - 5 Hz), Deeply asleep, highly non-cognitive
Delta states occurs roughly three time per day for twenty minute periods.
Most of the human condition occurs in Alpha and Theta states. Beta states
can rapidly deplete mental energies/neurochemical nutrients.
---
Dedicated to
Richard J. Reynolds III
and
Aymon de Roussy de Sales
------------------
I was constantly reminded in my glass work that the patterns I produced were first formed within my own mind, which I then proceeded to invest in the material. These patterns appeared to be an interpretation my mind was making of textures I had seen in the natural world. Invariably, the textures I created seemed altogether less powerful than those produced by nature: sheared rock or ice walls; frost on a window pane; light glimpsed through a drop of water on a car windshield at night — all textures I strove to duplicate with limited success.
So what were the patterns in my mind that became the template for my work? Were they simply an overlay of the natural world, or were they emotions and images derived from my inner life? What intent moved my hand as I masked the glass before carving it? Did my internal images and feelings of the day impress themselves subconsciously upon the textured glass, or were my gestures just habitual and automatic from numerous earlier commissions?
Again, I found myself wondering, to what extent were these patterns manipulated by other agents? Did I choose to conform or limit my expression to a set of dictates imposed by my client or by the architects I worked for? I can say honestly, I did, upon many occasions. This realization caused me to question to what extent are our internal dictates, the textures of our personality and perceptions, controlled by suggestion, conscious or otherwise? And what, if anything, can we do about it? And then, could the artistic implementation of radionic theory de-condition us from this conundrum?
— Duncan Laurie
“Kruchenykh’s most last contribution was his invention of zaum, a rubric that embraced the private languages of schizophrenics, folk incantations, baby talk, glossolalia, random onomatopoetic verse and Futurist neologisms. Called zaum from the prefix ‘za’ (beyond) and the root ‘um’ (mind). Kruchenykh’s concept originated in the natural dissociation between thought and speech in the highly charged brain…….The secret of primordial creation, that is, transrational language, could lead the artist far beyond the restraints of socially sanctioned patterns and the vise of national vocabularies.”
— Alexei Kruchenykh (Russian Cubo-Futurist, 1911)
“Songs from the Museum of the Future: Russian Sound Creation (1910-1930)” by Mel Gordon
------------------
“He views Western culture as ruled by a system of mass ventriloquy in which disembodied voices invade and occupy each individual… ...by alternating subliminal contradictory commands — ‘an integral part of the modern industrial environment: Stop. Go… Come in. Stay out… Rebel Submit. RIGHT. WRONG.’ — this modern system of control is able to ‘limit and satisfy on a mass scale’.…”
Robin Lydenberg, writing about William Burroughs’ language theory in The Job, 1974. (p. 45, 193)
------------------
“If you are listening to someone, that person’s voice is inside your head. It has to some extent invaded and occupied your brain.”
— William Burroughs
With William Burroughs: A Report from the Bunker, Victor Brockris, 1981, p. 197
------------------
“Make a painting of frequency.”
“Painting should not be exclusively retinal or visual; it should have to do with the gray matter, with our urge for understanding.”
Marcel DuChamp
Salt Seller, 1956, p. 25, 136 1
1 These four quotes were taken from Wireless Imagination – Sound, Radio and the Avante-Garde, Douglas Kahn and Gregory Whitehead (eds.), Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1992
---
01 REFLEXIVE CONTROL
JAMESTOWN, R.I.
John Norseen is a man of many identities and talents. He was first brought to my studio by a mutual friend at Lockheed Martin who thought he would enjoy seeing my radionic work with plants and sound. Norseen had the aura of a company VIP in town on quick business.
Norseen is a big white man in his late forties. He was wearing a suit, having just come from a meeting at the Naval War College across the bay. He was braced by crutches from a recent knee operation. As he hobbled around my studio, he spoke cryptically, appearing at one moment absorbed with an inner world. Then suddenly he would be yanked back out, saying things like: “There’s a plant in the Brooklyn Botanical Garden you have to go see…this is VERY important… there is information there you need…” and things like that.
Other comments led me to conclude that he had experience with Remote Viewing (RV). Remote Viewing is a form of (mainly military) intelligence gathering that involves the viewer entering a visionary trance and gathering intelligence of a remote location while outside his body.
Yet for all the strange bluster, Norseen was a very warm and open person. It was all the more peculiar to discover that he was, in fact, a very unusual weapons designer. The weapons he designed involved manipulation of the mind.
Of particular importance to Norseen was the study of Reflexive Control. Reflexive control is a term used to describe a state where someone surrenders volition to a powerful stimulus. Essentially, a series of events or warnings threatens a person’s immediate control. These events commandeer his attention to such an extent they overpower any habitual response, superimposing a new set of commands.
As my studio contained a small museum of radionic and psychotronic devices, Norseen realized that I must have a rudimentary knowledge of reflexive control, as that is precisely how a radionics operator seeks to change the direction of an illness in a patient. Nonetheless, it was highly unusual to be sharing thoughts and ideas about these forbidden technologies with someone from within the defense industry.
After the introduction, we began a tentative email dialogue. To better introduce and explain the nature of what he meant by reflexive control, Norseen related the following incident:
“The other day, I am sitting in the back yard and my daughter yells out, ‘Dad there’s a wasp trying to sting you...’
I looked down at the ground and saw the Shadow of a small bird-like thing darting and zig-zagging around my neck...
I took off running, artificial knee and all....
Duncan…it was the SHADOW on the ground and the TONE in my daughter's voice that made a grown man run like a chicken. I never actually FELT the damn wasp...but a SHADOW and a TONE took over my entire life for ten seconds or so.
Get it? I was a victim of a purely symbolic occurrence! My free will went out the window. I ran in any direction possible to free my self from some MENTAL SEMIOTIC that REFLEXIVELY CONTROLLED my Free Will.”
So, what I have been doing is making a very careful study of Semiotics, so that if the world ever constructs a weapon that can take away free will for ten seconds or a hundred years...well…You and I will be sitting at the Radionics Free Europe synthesizer, dialing in the deconditioning Frequencies...and maybe, just maybe, a DAN RATHER somewhere will finally figure out the game!” (i.e. What's the frequency, Kenneth?)
Thus begins a two year dialogue on all things visionary; of Outlaw Technology that can shape our perceptions and the role of consciousness in engineering, art and design.
fig_01.png
FIGURE 1: “MEMORY CREATION”
DUNCAN LAURIE
It wasn’t long before I became aware of the fact that John was part of a group of engineers at Lockheed deeply engaged in the study of semiotics. Semiotics is the study of signs and symbols through which we all communicate. In particular, Norseen was fascinated by the semiotic structure that connects the verbal and non-verbal sections of the brain. Much art is produced via this structure, and I would suggest alternative healing modalities like radionics operate from there as well.
Communicating with Norseen, however, remained a challenge. I sensed he wasn’t entirely certain about how far he could go in describing his work. As a result, I received a number of highly cryptic emails written in some haste. They contained technical terms I was unfamiliar with, coupled with the visionary rhetoric I had encountered in our first meeting. In this cryptic manner, Norseen was able to broach certain subjects without being entirely clear about what he was saying. It took me close to a year to understand what he was actually talking about.
During that time Norseen managed to visit my studio again. He became more familiar with the problem I was having trying to understand the technology of radionics and discuss it in terms of art. Essentially, I wanted to know if it was possible for a work of art to function energetically. That is to say, was it possible to go beyond the intellectual and emotional attributes of the artwork, its metaphorical nature, to actually move energy or do work in the physical world. Healing, weather modification, crop augmentation, self-protection were among the claims I had encountered among radionic practitioners. Similarly, indigenous peoples, both past and present, claim to accomplish the same tasks through art and ceremony.
fig_02.jpg
FIGURE 2: LAURIE STUDIO – PLANT BIOSENSORS AND INSTRUMENTS
When Norseen first arrived, I had been for some time working to extract signals, in the form of small voltages from plants and minerals. These voltages were converted into pitch shifts, further processed by algorithms and returned to the plants as orchestrated melodies. The premise was, if the plant had the capacity to musically respond to its own signal or those of another source, improvisation might occur. That was exactly what appeared to be happening.
Other experiments we had underway involved listening. We had done extensive research with a type of sound immersion technology that allowed the listener to lie on a bed and have sound surround them from above and below. Many people experiencing these sensations felt they enhanced the image-making faculty of the mind, especially when coupled with radionic tuners. Especially vivid were live broadcasts, such as those produced by our plants and sensors, and the background sounds from space, such as you hear between short-wave stations.
For Norseen, with his knowledge of brain-mapping and semiotics, my studio experiments were a fantastic embellishment of a world of ideas he knew well. I think realizing the possibility that the knowledge he was acquiring for military purposes might also have a significant creative venue was genuinely exciting. It gave him an incentive to open up. He began to take greater efforts at explaining his terms and putting his complex ideas into simple metaphors I could readily digest.
For my part, I was having difficulty verbalizing radionic technology as an art venue. It was also frustrating to see brilliant artists imitating shamanic ceremony, megalithic monument building and other energy-based art forms without really knowing much about how those art forms were designed to technically operate. To me, one answer lay in applying radionic principles to art methodologies, where they had elegantly functioned for millennia.
I wanted to design a modest platform where the experience of using subtle energy to fabricate art was unequivocally self-evident. I had turned to radionics and psychotronics because they were technologies that were made to move energy in the real world, however mysterious and un-scientific the means.
fig_03.jpg
FIGURE 3: LAURIE STUDIO - GENESIS BED 2 MUSIC MACHINE
I soon discovered that John’s work in semiotics, brain mapping, bio-fusion, reflexive control and all the other terminology employed in his studies and projects were a goldmine of information for the researcher in subtle energy. I fell into it, hungry for insight and application to my own modest efforts. Still, after all our discussions, it is difficult to know where to begin. Near the end of our dialogue, John passed along these comments:
“Duncan: The following thoughts are the basis for almost everything we have been talking about since we met. Perhaps, if placed at the very start of the Norseen Semiotic, they will put it all into perspective...
FIVE MAJOR ASPECTS OF THE NORSEEN SEMIOTIC
1) 50% of the brain is engaged in hand-eye coordination
2) 75% is engaged in ineffable, non-verbal communication
3) 25% in verbal communication
4) There has to be some kind of structure between the verbal and non-verbal parts of the brain, and that structure is semiotics.
5) The first semiotic structure is the “M” sound, of cave reverberation, the OM, of milk, mother, etc. That sound is the basic semiotic structure in the brain. It is related to hand/eye coordination, as the baby reaching for the mother, and it combines the verbal and non-verbal aspects of communication.
"Fifty percent of the human brain and central nervous system is engaged in Hand-Eye coordination...just look at a young new born human and see how soon they begin pointing their finger and trying to look at you or some object… making intonations and gestures to get you to respond to their thought patterns…show me that toy! Seventy-five percent of the brain is engaged in nonverbal, ineffable, communications development.
“During a rapid, preparatory onset of neuronal lay down in the ninth month prenatal of hundreds of thousands of neurons per minute in the brain do we slowly at birth and then with a more rapid pace generate the capability to speak language during infancy and childhood. A relatively small area of the brain, the Broca-Wernicke substructures along the left temporal and parietal lobes of the brain, assumes the primary responsibility for so much of our internal and interpersonal dialogues. But the vast majority of our brain is only loosely coupled to such language centers. In fact, of the original 40 or so sound types that we can access in early childhood to learn spoken language, many are lost as we consolidate into our much more limited adult vocabulary. Our many brains in one that we possess are not all equally engaged with our verbal centers. Much of what we think and who we are resides in a dark, ineffable world trying to establish semiotic links from the non-verbal into verbal consciousness.
fig_04.png
FIGURE 4: “MANY BRAINS” CONCEPT
“We are indeed driven by a relatively small verbal brain region in many of our endeavors in culture today. But, Art and Science are not both in the verbal region...they are born in the other 75% of the brain, that ineffable, non-verbal universe of thoughts and ideas and images. It is only after some deliberation and considerable thought structuring that we can lay claim to the ideas in the non-verbal world.
“Hence the Norseen Semiotic is not so much about what we can talk about, but about how our Universe becomes acceptable to us as verbal thoughts and words. The Norseen Semiotic is an attempt to provide a structure to how ART and Science can emerge and become known to us, and communicated to others, by linking ideas. One can say that the Norseen Semiotic is the basic alphabet that arises when information flows over brain structure.
“Just as Bernoulli's Equations denote the rules of how air flows over an airfoil structure to produce lift....the NS describes the flow of information over brain structure resulting in Thoughts. To name it is to know it, to know it is to have the power of IT. What is the name of God? The Name is Yahweh!" Hence, in the search for the Norseen Semiotic we encounter the signs and symbols of God and of Nature, and in them discover the origins of ART and SCIENCE in the Mind/Brain."
JOHN NORSEEN
“I laid out the unique structures of the human brain on a flat x, y grid and was amazed that with all the space available for structures to evolve with maximal, even optimal, energy and mechanical efficiency, I found that three functional groupings bang up next to each other, overlap, and share multiple interleaving physical linkages. This grouping goes way beyond sharing a common rich blood supply, because there would be better locations where each functional sub-topology could be better served with nutrients if they were separated from each other to a much greater extent, as they are in many other brain-based species.
The three areas that intertwine are the Violence, Sex, and Religious substructures of the human brain. And further, they are not smack dab in the middle for maximal protection...they hang out precariously, off-center, not apparently given any natural shielding.
Now Duncan, to me this is very weird from a biological engineering basis.
Either this is a very risky evolutionary event, or it smacks of some form of natural/artificial RE-ENGINEERING.
In either case, the result of Violence, Sex and Religious circuits being this close together is that any signal to one causes related circuits to fire in the others.
I was watching Walking Dinosaurs last night and the narrator says, the 50 ton diplodocus mounts the female. She can bear the weight of her prehistoric suitor because her pelvic bones are fused, enabling her to carry his intentions to continue the species. In the next scene, when attacked by an allosaurus, the male diplodocus rears up on his hind legs and fends off the attack.
Duncan, the same position for mating is the same position for violent defense of the animal. The end result is that successful sex or successful violence enable the species to continue the Prime Directive...the Prime Directive is in essence the religious substrates that interconnect and suffuse the Sex and Violence for what appears to be a teleological effect of creating a situation where the survival of the individual becomes the associated/inherent survival of the species.
Particularly in humans, the Neural Connections are elaborate and immense in number and co-location, and in a position where not only internally generated signals cause them to fire...but they are exceptionally prone to receiving many forms of EXTERNAL signals which get interpreted as being internally derived.
It is exactly this extremely keen sensitivity to both INTERNAL and EXTERNAL signals, from sight, sound, smell, touch, memory, ultrasound, EMF, etc. that causes the human brain to be in essence, a SEX, VIOLENCE, RELIGIOUS Pump.
My DATABASE of Semiotics, Signs and Symbols, when presented by various media to the human brain cause tremendously strong circuits to fire in the Nucleus Accumbens (Sex), Amygdala (Violence), and Anterior Cingulate/right temporal axis (Religion).
Duncan, fire one area, all areas respond. It is surreal.
So even if a person wouldn't do something based on his personality, the key is to reset or disengage the person’s personality (free will), and then repeatedly train either consciously or non-cognitively the person's brain to fire relentlessly such phase lock looped circuits, to the point where you insert a new personality that acts upon the impulses emanating from the SEX/ VIOLENCE /RELIGIOUS circuits. You end up with a SEX offender, a Serial Killer, a Religious Zealot wherein suicide is an option...or any combination the three.
Duncan, somewhere, somehow, the result of culture at large, or highly refined and focused cultural inputs, is turning out just such PERSONALITIES...The Question is, is this just the natural results of Five Billion people on earth interacting with modern information and EM signals...or maybe, just maybe...somewhere, SOME PEOPLE ARE USING TECHNICAL MEANS FOR PSYOP????
In Jenin, there must be specific training camps that are now producing remarkable numbers of FADAI or self-sacrificing suicide teams...much like the BUSHIDO ops of Japan in WWII, and at various times in history...only today, there is a much better understanding and precise insertion set of protocols to flip a person's suicide circuit, or sex circuit or religious circuit....
The Zen of Freud, so to speak.”
DUNCAN LAURIE
Theoretically, according to Norseen, each thought represents an energy dispersion pattern which can be monitored by mixed electromagnetic sensors and described mathematically as a “Brain Print”. This brain-print can be inverted and retransmitted back into the brain much like an encoded memory. Subsequently, the brain will act upon this inverse signal as if it were a real signal from the environment.
fig_05.png
FIGURE 5: VISUAL BRAIN PRINT
According to the NS, the semiotic is the repository of a specifically charged piece of information. Lab rats will hit a button that discharges a frequency to the brain resulting in sexual stimulation long after their body’s pleasure apparatus has ceased functioning. They will continue rigorously doing so until dead. The rat's brain continues to benefit from the discharging pleasure semiotic. In this illustration, the semiotic is discharging information into the mind/body of the host purely by virtue of a small electromagnetic field impacting a specific region in the brain.
Norseen's point was that if you could trigger that part of the brain remotely, via a transmission of some kind, the receiver would be all but powerless over the transmitted response.
As I was to discover, a central figure in the field of Reflexive Control was the Russian scientist and distinguished member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Andrej V. Brushlinsky 3. Norseen had visited him not so very long before we met. Subsequently, Brushlinsky was found robbed and murdered. Norseen believes he was killed by foreign agents, seeking the scientific protocols he had developed for a type of weaponized “thought insertion” called steganography, or “Stego Bullets” for short. Some months later I came across the following Pravda report:
“The latest piece of news connected with the investigation of Andrej Brushlinsky’s murder is dated January 31. The Office of the Moscow Public Prosecutor informed that day that the official version of his death was an armed attack, criminal proceedings were instituted on the basis of the murder, and that the criminals also stole documents from the victim. That was all.
“In the meantime, the director of the institute for the psychological precautions against terrorism, Professor Viktor Fersht, released a sensational statement. He said that Brushlinsky did not fall the victim of street robbers. The briefcase contained exclusive documents about the newest, reflexive method of searching for terrorists. The concept was developed at one of the labs of the mentioned institute, and professor Lepsky was in charge of that work.
“Russkaya Linia (Russian Line) news agency reported that Brushlinsky received the documents two hours before he died. He was supposed to present the concept of ‘Psychology and its Supplements’ at a conference. The authors of the unique technology were publicly talking about their ideas.
“As it was said, the point of the new method was the principle that allowed one to find any criminal; various psychological reflections, processed by computers, make for the detection of a terrorist.
“These new methods have already been sent to the Pentagon; a report on the subject was supposed to take place at the Russian-NATO seminar in a month. Professor Fersht wrote, ‘These methods are currently being developed at the Institute for Psychological Precautions together with the Russian Home Ministry.’ Fersht offered to use these methods to find Brushlinsky’s killers.
“Andrey Brushlinsky, 68 years old, was killed on the night of January 31 in the entrance of his building. He has worked at the institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences since 1972. The professor was basically studying the psychology of a person and human thinking.
Sergey Stefanov
PRAVDA.Ru
Translated by Dmitry Sudakov”
Norseen pointed out that subsequent to the theft of Brushlinsky’s briefcase, a whole new genre of suicide bombers, very atypical of the previous norm, began operating. In addition, certain recognizable features of these techniques became noticeable to him and others familiar with the technology. Similar signatures were also appearing in various media contexts, such as popular songs and doom websites.
The implication was clearly that a command (encrypted as information contained within information), akin to a hypnotic suggestion, can be buried within unrelated visual and auditory information, to be broadcast to the general public. Norseen strongly suggested these techniques were connected to the Columbine murders, as though the killers had been infected from encrypted web sites beforehand, designed intentionally as trial behavior test scenarios.
PERCEPTION MANAGEMENT
In an interview by Ryan Moore for MilitaryTransistion.com 4 on February 24, 2003, Norseen was asked a number of interesting questions about Information Warfare (IW) techniques and their dual use role between Madison Avenue and PSYOP.
“The key word in understanding Perception Management, whether for selling beer or conducting PSYOP is ‘Expectation’. Tons of advertising research dollars swirls down the drain getting commercials right and the audience wrong… You have to either match up the right situations or control the expectation level of the target audience – this holds true for either media or PSYOP management.
fig_06.png
FIGURE 6: INFORMATION WARFARE TECHNOLOGIES
“But imagine if you could actually monitor expectations non-invasively, quietly, garnering sufficient measurement of how ‘Designed Information’ is interacting with the central nervous system of the intended audience. This is what the Science Of Semiotics – signs and symbols – is heading towards, and can be seen today in forms such as ‘Engagement Indices’ and other biometric techniques of audience attention. This would appear to be the logical extension of Neuro-control into marketing and perception management.
Ryan Moore asks: “What do you see as the potential civilian and military applications of ‘Information Injection’ technology?”
Norseen replies: “If ‘Information Injection’ pans out – the concept that human perception is made up of certain invariant electromagnetic, and biochemical, lock and key interactions with brain structure which can be identified, measured and altered by mathematical/technical operations – then the stage is set to observe, capture, rearrange and play-back human mental functions from one person to another, or into any combination of man-machine system interface. The development of such Cortical Emulation Software, if successful, will rapidly usher in the potential for automated personal diaries -- Emotional Recordings, Mental Cameras, and Digital Biographies. Just as we today catalogue millions of people by fingerprints, this strongly suggests the future ability to use Brain-Prints as the key biometric signature identifier in Total Information Awareness.”
fig_07.png
FIGURE 7: BIOFUSION - ORIGIN AND FOCUS
After answering a number of pragmatic questions about the state of Information Warfare today, Norseen was then questioned about the ethics of such research. In response to this question, he said:
“…the full impact of brain research on future military and civilian activities is not well understood in the current National Security domain.
“Right now there is no enforceable bioethics authority to prevent psychological abuses that emanate from cyberspace!
“Consider this: Right now the Hyper-Spectral Region below 100 Hz is wide open – the Wild, Wild West! And all brains on this planet operate in this very important Twilight Zone!”
By implication therefore, anyone harmed by technology impacting them in the area below 100 Hz, where the body conducts all its electrical activity, has no legal or financial recourse from the individual/agency/corporation responsible.
2 “Genesis Bed” designed by Michael H. Bradford, Bio-Innergy Systems, Inc., www.bioinnergy.com ( Offline as of July 2010. February 2008 snapshot on archive.org )
3 Brushlinsky, Andrej V., former Director of the Institute of Psychology, Russian Academy of Sciences
4 Ryan Moore, http://www.militarytransition.com/, 2003. ( Offline as of July 2010. February 2005 snapshot on archive.org )
---
02 RADIONICS and SEMIOTICS
FIGURE 8: ANASAZI PETROGLYPH
FIGURE 8: ANASAZI PETROGLYPH
Semiotics, in the manner Norseen applies it, is a study of the structure by which we all communicate. We have to become the right tuning fork, find the right resonances with whom we converse, to understand the communications. When he encountered the sound and shadow of the wasp, Norseen spoke of the reaction impacting the amygdala section of the brain, momentarily overwhelming consciousness with a learned fear. The wasp signal springs to life an information “pattern” stored within the Amygdala section of the brain, modulated by the Locus Cereleus, and Striatum Beds, precipitating a specific biological reaction. He was illustrating how different semiotic resonances can cause our perceptions of reality to change.
FIGURE 9: ABRAMS EARLY 19TH CENTURY RADIONICS DEVICE
FIGURE 9: ABRAMS EARLY 19TH CENTURY RADIONICS DEVICE
The semiotics trigger a latent behavior pattern coded into memory by a symbol. Likewise, the symbol will trigger a resonance in the brain of a specific memory or circumstance. This resonance can be extracted by a variety of possible means. For instance, the delivery mechanism could be a visual cue (like the hornet), or a specific a drug, or a subliminal pattern encrypted into something innocuous, such as a musical tone or phrase. The delivery could also be through something indeterminate, like a radionic intention, which acts upon non-verbal patterning in the brain.
Radionics is a methodology for calibrating intention and translating it into a means capable of manipulating pattern. It is a way of moving energy by use of the mind. Art acts in a radionic manner when the artwork compels a reaction from the viewer. By virtue of the stored intention of the artist invested in the medium, an effect on the viewer is predicted. In this sense, the artwork is also a semiotic structure. Art-making, Radionics and the Norseen Semiotic all converge in meaning around this one task, transfer of intent from artist to observer of art. Each discipline reveals something about the others.
FIGURE 10: 21ST C. VERLAG ART-BASED RADIONICS DEVICE
FIGURE 10: 21ST C. VERLAG ART-BASED RADIONICS DEVICE 5
Art-making can be a way of moving energy and changing assumptions in the viewer’s mind. Radionics can be better understood if viewed as a semiotic apparatus of some kind. Semiotics provides a language for overcoming the self-referential limitations and occult context of radionic technology. Art processes make semiotics comprehensible in ordinary day to day terms.
Norseen suggested that what occurs when a revolutionary artwork is inserted into cultural consciousness is that the artist has welded together the resonant frequencies of various semiotic structures that hitherto have not been associated in the public mind. As the semiotics within the artwork hit the brain of the viewer (the Interpretant) extreme emotions can result. These emotions can be as severe in their own way as the semiotic shadow of the wasp was to Norseen in his back yard. The art form goes beyond metaphor, energetically behaving like something filled with motive force that discharges its capacitance (semiotic information) into the viewer’s consciousness.
The semiotitians view this process more like the radionic practitioner would. A signal triggers a pattern in the brain that results in energy being moved, i.e. a healing takes place or an emotional reaction occurs. Both are information to energy transactions.
The technical details are critical to understanding the connection of semiotics to radionics as well as their scientific feasibility. Theoretically, each thought represents an energy dispersion pattern which can be monitored by mixed electromagnetic sensors and described mathematically in a brain print. This brain print can be inverted and retransmitted back into the brain much like an encoded memory, and the brain will act upon this inverse signal as if it were a real signal from the environment. This process is what Norseen refers to as “BioFusion” in his work and literature. Theoretically, a brain print is a form of identification that also carries knowledge of intent. If you alter the brain print in some manner, you also alter the intent. This would explain why BioFusion has potential as an offensive and defensive weapons system.
FIGURE 11: AUDITORY BRAIN PRINT
FIGURE 11: AUDITORY BRAIN PRINT
Let me put the concept of BioFusion in the context of a family experience. I am with my wife and daughters on vacation in a remote part of the Maine seacoast near the Canadian border. We are in our little white farmhouse; it is dark and lonely and the Milky Way is bright overhead. I sit by digesting my early conversations with Norseen. My teen daughter asks us to watch the film “8 Mile”, the story of a rap musician, Eminem, growing up in suburban Detroit.
The movie is about rap music “contests”. Rap musicians square off against each other in nightclubs using linguistic combat. I begin to sense in this art form a method of unwinding the cultural semiotic. The viewer of these linguistic battles begins to feel how our society has failed to deliver on its promises to these youths in every way.
The artistic combat is to see who can get deeper, via their language, into the core of each issue, i.e. whatever is being “rapped” about. Language itself is coupled with beat, and together they become an “instrument” for cultural deconditioning. The procedure appears to have radionic overtones. Powerfully felt intention is supplied by Eminem; the rap discourse (the instrument} serves to decondition cultural assumptions of the audience. The pressure on the rap performer is to shed emotional superficialities. He must embody a powerful authenticity in order to entrain his audience. When he does, a powerful current, the carrier wave of liberation spreads like a catharsis through the audience.
I could sense in this film the energetic power of highly tuned semiotics. The effect was the diametrical opposite of using directed intention for the purpose of controlling someone’s perceptions or motivations. Yet, the linguistic skill of Eminem had much in common with Reflexive Control & BioFusion, excepting that it liberated the recipient’s energy rather than tighten it down.
To understand one, it seems, is to know the other. That is the hope and the danger. We might want to give the artist some better tools....
JOHN NORSEEN
“You got it. Amygdala and Reflexive Control. I especially liked the rapper discussion...correct. I will go over this again and make specific markings, but you are on the right track. All communication is Symbol as defined by Object, Representation and Interpretation...communication is the flow of intention as energy using semiotics as the roadmap.
Imagine a humming bird feeder. It is full of red sweet fluid. The bird or insect that sees this goes wild because not only does it compel where to land, but sustains life; the entire occupation and life senses of the bird or insect now swarm about this red fluid in the bird feeder...the Semiotic. Now if this bird feeder is equipped with a resonance machine or extra endomorphs...it can actually reach out and snare the bird or insect as opposed to it being a chance encounter.
I see Art and Radionics as more and more of this Purposeful conversion of intent into energy using semiotics of a more and more powerful kind…the powerful kind that automatically cause reflexive control in the brain system...the amygdala in particular. The amygdala executes pure memory; you cannot distinguish it from dream or real life or intense imagination...it is pure signal. When you can create Semiotics that Radionically manifest at the pure signal level, then the Artwork or semiotic is directly tied into the REALITY of the intention and is very powerful...in some brains this is total control. Use of semiotics and radionics can in effect turn someone’s brain into a tool of intentional control.
5 Romanassi, Claudio, "Energietransmitter"© 2005, Radionik Verlag, http://www.radionik.info
---
03 KRYLOV SPACE
Norseen used the term “crush a person in Krylov space”, in referring to Brushlinsky’s work to describe how suicide bombers are influenced to relinquish their lives. How does one condition a person to commit suicide? The answer, he asserted, is that a particular trigger exists in the brain, the suicide circuit.
JOHN NORSEEN
“The 150 circuits that form the platform of our human behavior can be expressed in Krylov Space. Krylov space reveals the dark areas of the brain where the personality can become trapped in anonymity, or conversely, indicates where we communicate with others.” (Krylov mathematical methods and analyses are used for solving non-singular linear systems, in numerical as well as symbolic computation. There is no universally agreed upon definition for the term.)
Brushlinsky’s methods were unique; he designed psychotronic technology to push the individual’s consciousness into that part of Krylov space where the suicide circuit could be triggered. As Norseen pointed out, drugs can accomplish this work too, referring to the school massacre in Russia by suicide terrorists. In fact, Norseen asserted that common anti-depressants contained a version of the suicide circuit in them as well, molecularly altered to counter its influence. Consider that Viagra stimulates the sex circuit, weight loss pills suppress the eating circuit; in the same fashion, trigger a suicide circuit and bingo, you have a suicide bomber!
“The basic structure of Krylov Space is a STRING...in fact a String can be transformed into any other structure in the universe....so a STRING PROCESS is the Key to Reflexive Control...in essence, you find a small crack in someone's soul, and then you go about prying it open just enough to lay in a bit of string...and then let the wave action of the brain transport it to thoughts unknown..
“So Back to the Krylov Space results...When children are tested, over 80% of them are in the positive corners...but adults over 25 test in at only 63-66% positive…right along the Golden Ratio....now, in known schizophrenics and others with psychotic tendencies, they still test roughly positive at 49-53%....now this represents about 3+ sigma of the population....and then there are basically WRONGLY WIRED UNITS...and they test out in the 5-15% completely negative corners of the Krylov Space, hovering around the dangerous null/twist reversal points....
“What this tells me is that the evolutionary push for Humans is that at Birth up till age 25, most humans give life a running chance and think basically positive...But at the same time, there is a general side of the population to think, hence act, negatively and can be rapidly drawn to negative polarity thinkers…..Free Will is a Semiotic Tug of War. The more you are around people, the greater the chances that you will see it disappear.”
Norseen mentioned the case of a surviving Palestinian teenager suicide bomber. Apparently his brain was not sufficiently developed to accept the modification. Currently, his case is being studied by a group in Lund, Sweden investigating the role of the Superior Colliculus in suicide attempts. They put him in a hypnotic trance to re-live the episode, and then study those areas of the brain that operate in the fashion described. The trigger to “will I or will I not commit suicide,” sits near the sex and religion and violence centers of the brain, as previously discussed.
FIGURE 12: CHILD SUICIDE BOMBER WHOSE MISSION FAILED
FIGURE 12: CHILD SUICIDE BOMBER WHOSE MISSION FAILED
Take a depressed person, one exhausted by war or crushing and intolerable social circumstances. How hard is it to find such a recruit these days in the Middle East? In eras past, hashish helped push this role of Fadai, or self-sacrifice along. Likewise, witness Bushido in Japan, the Hari-Kari ceremony, where an ideal reality in death is ritually superimposed over the grim reality on the ground. Norseen mentioned specifically the Kamikaze pilots of WW II placing the semiotic of the rising sun on their instrument panels prior to ramming an enemy ship with their plane. In this way, they do not believe they are dying, but entering the semiotic glory of the Rising Sun.
Theoretically Brushlinsky’s psychotronic inventions bypassed the indoctrination process of ages past. Rather, psychotronic devices work by directly broadcasting the molecular resonant frequencies necessary to open up the suicide circuit in the brain of the subject, thereby gaining control of their mental attitude.
Should these startling assertions prove true, one must carefully re-examine the tactics Israel and America are employing to subjugate hostile populations of the Middle East. As these populations face progressively degrading circumstances, more and more individuals will become prone to manipulation by means like those developed by Dr. Brushlinsky. It would seem, given the development of reflexive control technology, that the burgeoning human suicide bomber population cannot be halted by the use of massive military force alone. Rather, the condition of hopelessness and despair among these populations must be relieved; with faith in discourse, economic and political optimism restored, making such human manipulation unfeasible.
------------------
BioFusion is my name for the next generation of biometric security/intelligent inter-netted security systems. Please note that a fundamental basis to BioFusion is that brain structures execute biological functions, and that such functions can be represented and understood as mathematical equations existing in biophysical time/space/frequency/phase/quantum state Space, spoken of here as Gabor function (wavelet/codelet) in Hilbert Space.
What Exactly is BioFusion?
BioFusion is described as what happens when you think (a precise mathematical operation), to include:
When multiple sensors can detect and measure what you think, (Hyperspectral Analysis) and
Map where thoughts are in your brain, and then via "Information Injection"
Monitor, Enhance, Modify, Replace, or Prevent Neural Circuit Function — In Essence,
Enhance, Replace, or Prevent THOUGHTS!
Extremely Inter/Multi-Disciplinary *NSF NBIC Model*
Accordingly, such mathematical representations lend themselves to machine/computational interpretation and cross machine/computational communications, hence the capability for Human-Machine interaction, and prediction of calculated results. Therefore, if known neurological circuits, reading this page, or silently saying a sequence of numbers, or closing one's eyes and imagining a picture…let's say the image of the Mona Lisa…then with the proper sensing techniques, a display based on the underlying mathematical-biophysical space can be generated which represents the very same neurological functioning. There is vast biomedical evidence of this in PET, MEG, EEG, FMRI, etc. which capture various neurological events faithfully and repeatedly. BioFusion extends the singular look of these various medical diagnostic techniques and merges them into a much more robust hyper spectral analysis across the electromagnetic spectrum, within which brain function occurs, to correlate and pinpoint with more accurate detail the specific, self-similar regions of the brain engaged in mental processing of the target activity.
By compiling a rather extensive database of discrete brain functions involved with Vision, Word/Number Generation, Speaking, Mental Rehearsal of Specific Scenarios, Day Dreaming and comparing this to various data concerning analysis of mental pathologies, a more definitive analysis can be made. That analysis can discriminate new data into discrete subgroups that reflect the various categories of the neurological circuits as belonging to normal, versus pathological, versus trained thought structures. The collection of sensor data can be made which can be defined as belonging to normal, pathological or specifically trained behavioral circuits.
Now, I want to address some points that remain at loose ends in our conversation:
1) Visualization of numeric information takes place in a region roughly surrounding certain occipital or rear brain locations. Concomitant mental verbal processing of similar numeric information takes place in a region roughly surrounding left temporal brain locations. By looking at sensor data during the visualization and verbal processing, different numbers tend to be correlated with consistent grid locations, such that by correlating the grid location with the level of sensor data, a composite prediction of the likely number being mentally processed can be posited. With further identification and analysis (I & A), such a processed grid of number locations can be made that can be tied to a specific individual. This indicates that without knowledge of the person, a legitimate estimation of the number can be made, and further that with, or without, knowledge of the person, a map of their specific number processing can also be made.
2) Sufficient analysis of underlying brain activity using hundreds of contact and imbedded electrodes has resulted in the ability to only require four or less sensors in contact with the head to be able to result in the same level of analysis. Ongoing research using only a single surface contact sensor, or a series of sensors in close proximity to the skull, and also new concepts that involve internal or cross illumination and more remote sensor analysis using interferometer techniques, all indicate that information about underlying neural activity can be collected, mandated against stored, active database evidence, and displays generated of ongoing and anticipated future mental behavioral patterns, normal, pathologic, or trained. Therefore, a sensor in near propinquity to an individual can be considered sufficient to collect information, which can satisfy the desired neurological analysis of likely behavioral patterns. An example could be a sensor apparatus in the dome of an ATM kiosk that could be able to discern the silently evoked number sequence of a person entering their four digit pin code to extract cash. This activity represents a potential information/business security risk to the individual and the banking interest involved and countermeasures need to be addressed at some point. Evidence that underlying brain activity can be measured from sensor packages remote to the person can be seen in the ability for infrared sensors that can determine the level of blood flow in a person's prefrontal lobes, by analysis of the heat from oxygenation processes emanating from the forehead and eyes. Assessment of patterns of concentration and purposeful behavioral patterns can be discerned by analysis of prefrontal lobe activity and eye movements.
WARNING: John D. Norseen, Spring 1998
The introduction of "Biologic" Intelligent Agents into our Information Technology Networks is Imminent
3) The level of understanding of a person’s underlying thoughts leads back to the basic premise of BioFusion...Neural circuits that reflect normal, pathological or trained brain patterns can be discerned. Therefore, if a complex system of Internetted, hyperspectral brain analysis sensors, exchanging database information packages of representative mathematical equations and biophysical state spaces, would be able to survey a particular area and determine the brain activities of the constituent elements of the surveillance area. A person with normal brain patterns would have characteristic brain prints that would be different than another person suffering from some pathological or trained pattern of behavior. Evidence for this is found in post mortems and in other research where biomedical devices can show the pathology of disease in particular cases. Development of data profiles of a person previously trained in a violent or terrorist behavioral pattern would, much as a pathologic pattern shows up, also would show up as different and would act as a cue to conduct further investigation of that person.
4) A very important issue is that the brain is involved in various levels of energy utilization and tends to act to conserve energy. Brain structures can be shown through various energy tagging procedures that 'truth' related neurological functions are maintained in low energy, hence outside regions of the brain, while other functions, defined as ‘confabulation or more complex orientations of information’ require a greater degree of brain function, hence more energy, and can be clearly shown on real time and captured recording of brain-behavior. The brain does not determine what is truth or falsity, but engages in progressively more energy utilization with more and more complex mental = behavioral patterns of activity, which, via hermeneutic logic analysis of such Brain Prints can be determined to be true or false, to a scientific certainty meeting legal requirements for probable cause. Such true vs. false energy differences shows up very clearly on Brain Print displays.
A functional prototype system to perform the above described capabilities was stated to be available in the 03-10 Jan 2000 issue of US News and World Report by 2005, and with accelerated funding and experimentation could be realized even earlier.
FIGURE 13: THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
FIGURE 13: THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM 6
LETTER TO JOHN NORSEEN
“Dear John, Overall, I have never been too excited about the Standing PSYOP instructions in the DoD and elsewhere...maybe you may want to recommend a brand new Set of Principles, using your invigorated TAAWS as an operational example for future PSYOP.
“What form of PSYOP are you...tactical, op art, theater or strategic? Poindexter is building TIA total information awareness architecture. Will you be part of that end game? The Adm sees himself at these vectors…Time vector...way in advance…Space vector influencing the R&D efforts...Scope vector...regions of the US or world...like the northeast corridor and larger...Center of Gravity vector...using perceptions and technology layers to direct open and closed loop Decision Cycles...See my Semiotic Attack pyramid. And Attack vector: Information Injection...aggressive use of CULTURALLY INDEPENDENT In(form)ation.
“John my strongest urge to you is to find ways to create and store ammunition lockers full of Culturally Independent and Culturally Dependent STEGO-Bullets...Find information sets, Semiotics that cause anyone anywhere to have some Behavioral Circuit - Reflexive Control fire off, whether it comes from music, or smell, or TV/movies....look to the world of Neuro-Science and Neuro-Facilitation = One of your TAAWS can contain the following... Is my detainee ready to commit FADAI? Was my detainee trained to commit FADAI? IF “no” to the above two questions, is this person's mental make up amenable to FADAI instruction. If “no” then you do not have a suicide terrorist on your hands. You may have something else, but it would be nice to know in the Database of TAAWS that your person in particular has this or that particular Neuro-Finding Profile.
“This is the worst case scenario...then you would like to know...Is this person a Mullah or Local or regional Commander? You can find this out also with Neuro-Questioning. So if you have someone that is not FADAI and not an Operator in Command, then you really have found out that you can relegate this one to less attention and go on to the next subject for Battlefield...or preparation of the Zone interrogation.
FIGURE 14: SEMIOTIC ATTACK
FIGURE 14: SEMIOTIC ATTACK
“If you got your trip to Israel approved, I would encourage you to meet with Dr. X. You can introduce yourself as a colleague of mine who is interested in her work in Braid Theory as applied to Human Agents.
“This is the frontline in Human Interrogation based on understanding of where information/truth verification resides in the human psyche (as an exact result of brain equations -- remember, thoughts and truth is a function of information interacting with brain structures)...this is culturally independent and precise, repeatable, and amenable to information injection/ interrogation...only after information moves from one region of the brain to another is it becoming under cultural bias and confabulation. If you have a pristine Stego-bullet and inject it into a person and you can track where it goes. It goes into a truth pathway. Seek that pathway and it will show you the truth. That pathway may be very serpentine, but it will be nonetheless the truth baseline for that person. We all need such baselines...such baselines become the starting point for Strategic PSYOP to either get there or go back there or start from there.
“Also, I can put you in contact with the right folks at NGIC in Charlottesville, VA involved in cataloging the effects of Nootropics and other neuro-effects, which will play a much greater role in future PSYOP. I guess I am encouraging you in your Thesis to talk about Strat PSYOP, the future of PSYOP, the role of information injection and mental equations, and the neuro-physiological basis for more scientific use of PSYOP, and the role of culturally independent mind agents to steer an individual or group to truth. As in Ephesians 6:12-18, to put on a helmet of truth, and to know what is good. Please know that a biochemical THIQ is very, very powerful and can make almost anyone do things that are truly unbelievable.
“I wish I were in your shoes so I could investigate the role of the following in training the suicide Fadai, the Egyptian pilot of TWA 800 and the training camps of Mugniyah and Al Zawahiri, look closely into the Patrice LaMumbo institute in Russian and the Middle Eastern graduates -- especially the Neuro-scientific training they underwent. We will face the continuation of these Information Injection and Golden Dream equations in our future war on Terrorism.
“John, I am going to be working more closely with the non-lethal aspect of PSYOP using Brain Injection and Dream Sequencing...you may want to read over Future War by John Alexander…I may also be able to put you in contact with John if you wish. You can see some of it on the web...
“Also, for background...type in the following on your search engine: Grill Flame and Stargate, or Scannate - bring that up to 2010 and you are where I am going. The kind of stuff you may want to research is Program Igloo White from Vietnam; you may have to go into the JMIC vaults for this. You should also re-look at what Colby did at Bien Hoa hospital in Vietnam - he may be gone now but a good source here is the Science Advisor to CENTCOM. I can feed you a bit based on my talks with Colby before he died in his canoe...(a heart attack) about Shadow (MACVSOG) within Phoenix. The future of PSYOP, as I am talking about it, grew out of this period, going way back of course to MKULTRA and the Dulles brothers at Langley under the first stop programs: Artichoke and Bluebird. The legacy for today is still the work of Persinger in the Canadian labs...with neat stuff on training people in near death experiences in New Zealand. I can fill you in on the avante garde work here…it even goes into Dubrov's work and the work at Kharkov University where KGB Spetsnaz went into flat line conditions to receive their Stego-bullet instruction sets for their dream missions. This, of course, goes to my visits to Moscow where, unfortunately, Brushlinsky was just found murdered in his apartment. He was passionate with me about his ability to use Dream Sequences to prepare for mission rehearsal. So you may want to search on Brushlinsky. This will take you into the marine mammal experiments with information injection and then back again to our programs within Air Research and Edwin May. There is really juicy stuff here and you will get a charge out of it. But beware; it can bite you very quickly. I know, it bit me too.
“You picked #6 uses of Muslim clerics as PSYOP most likely to succeed. I know this, but why...they are trained in the Brain Interrogation and preparation methods I am talking about. In 1994, the Israelis used a flight of gun ships to hit a three-car Mercedes caravan in the Beak Valley, they blew up the middle car and killed Hussein Musawi. If you look at HM in 1984, the press of Beirut, the Green Line speakeasy, the Village Voice -- they all called him the main man...and then the US took our hits...and then 10 years later the Israelis killed him. Why? They answered my three questions: Are you Fadai...are you trained in Fadai....are you the leader of this Fadai...yes, yes, yes...and they eliminated him. It took ten years, but that is the game...John - this is serious sh*t....and I ain't kidding around. These guys play for keeps and they are getting better at KRYLOV SPACE --- now they can train women to blow up in shopping centers on command. This is PSYOP, and it all comes down to the Brain Injection stuff I am talking about.
BIO AGENTS CAN NOW BE INJECTED INTO INFORMATION SYSTEMS TO ATTACK THE OPERATOR
“I would even propose that for the detainees in GITMO we create a database on the 300 or so...and ask each one with a BioFusion cap on their heads -- Are you Fadai, are you trained in Fadai, are you a leader of Fadai. And this would be a very valuable data base, would it not????
“Use Ephesians and seek the truth to create your # 7 – peaceful methods, with a Brain Print to certify that they are indeed peaceful...
“John, with my BioFusion it is this simple: Are you Fadai? Are you Peaceful? Seek the truth for these answers and you will find the truth for future PSYOP. The answer is a simple yes or no. BioFusion clearly shows the answer… Good Luck Hunting Norseen
FIGURE 15: VAK (VISUAL, AUDITORY, KINESTHETIC)
FIGURE 15: VAK (VISUAL, AUDITORY, KINESTHETIC)
“Right now, John, I can do BioFusion with just one sensor on the bridge of the nose. But soon, like this time next year, we can do BioFusion from a distance of several to tens of feet away and further with special technical methods. I can build your PSYOP database anytime you want...
“When I was in Russia, the Ruskies had a Krylov Space that could basically take a person’s attributes and calculate a Soul Index, and then they showed me technical means to move the Soul Index around a multi-dimensional conformal board wherein Free Will would be either minimized or maximized using Reflexive Control, and at certain black hole like locations on the board, the soul would just drop in and undergo a complete role reversal; it was easy to get souls to drop off line, but not so easy to reverse the process and bring them out undamaged. My current colleagues in the Neural Linguistic Programming NLP and techniques similar to the Heaven's Gate process, indicate to me that the Human Brain is set up as three interoperating, but separate layers of coded information…we have a VAK unit in our skull, the V is Visual and we set a visual culture that becomes our vision of reality, we have an Auditory world where we talk silently to ourselves and to our demons and desires and gods, and where they can talk to us...and we have the Kinesthetic, where we feel the world culture and how the world touches us...If one is a master of VAK, then one can take a needle and semiotic thread and weave a most interesting stitch in a fellow brain...we can pattern a quilt or sew the yin on top of the yang. Yours truly, xxx”
Norseen’s diabolical friend, xxx, whose email assertions claimed mastery over Krylov Space, had given the impression that human consciousness was nothing more than a set of open parameters that were easy to influence with the right tools. In the jungle, where domination insures survival, the engineering of Krylov Space has enormous potential, should it be found as effective as claimed. It implies the major components of our identity could be boiled down into mathematical language and that people we don’t know or trust would be tampering with it from a far.
Artists have their own version of Krylov Space and what to do with it. In my experience, the higher use of Krylov Space is a platform for vision, where forces beyond the ego enter the mind as internal experience to teach and guide the individual in spiritual life. Krylov Space, or whatever you want to call it, is the interface with the worlds beyond our waking consciousness. It exists so that we can enter it as a journey to learn of our true identity.
My experience of Krylov Space consists of witnessing extremely powerful imagery, coherent images of photographic clarity in the mind’s eye. Another term for this is “eidetic” imagery. To qualify as a visionary experience, eidetic imagery must have an extremely powerful emotional impact on the viewer. Such visions can be prophetic and also sequential, evolving with the viewer’s life in an interactive manner.
FIGURE 16: DUNCAN LAURIE – “TOURBILLION” PENCIL ON PAPER
FIGURE 16: DUNCAN LAURIE
“TOURBILLION” PENCIL ON PAPER
One summer evening in 1978, while lying in bed, eyes closed in a deeply restful state, I suddenly found myself standing on a plateau with a large funnel of flame and smoke roaring up into the air on the horizon before me. Beyond the purely visual impact of the phenomenon, there was such a feeling of incredible energy emanating from the whirlwind that I felt immense trepidation. After a few moments it was over, for the time being.
The vision remained vividly imbedded in my mind. The next day I drew it on paper. Some weeks later I carved it into a piece of glass, to which I added some tendrils emerging from the edge of the picture towards the whirlwind in the center that was an artistic embellishment signifying visionary experience.
I came to realize that the design embellishment added an element to the experience which helped me to interpret its meaning. In this case, the tendrils seemed to be grasping at the whirlwind, or perhaps shrinking away from it.
A short time later, I encountered the whirlwind again under similar conditions. This time the whirlwind was twisting like a tornado and moving toward me. The energy and power of the twister were now firmly related to feeling merged with another energetic reality in a transcendent way.
FIGURE 17: DUNCAN LAURIE – “TOURBILLION” CARVED GLASS
FIGURE 17: DUNCAN LAURIE
“TOURBILLION” CARVED GLASS
When I translated the drawing of the second experience into glass, I found myself adding converging lines from where I was standing before the whirlwind down to the base of the funnel. It looked as though many roads were all ending at the point the whirlwind exploded from the ground into the sky. Looking at what I had drawn, I realized that I was on that road; that any road I took, I was headed toward that consuming experience and it was headed toward me.
A few weeks later, a visiting friend looked at the whirlwind pictures and said in a matter of fact way, “Oh, that’s a Tourbillion.” He went on to add that besides being a word meaning “a whirlwind of fire”, it also had a connotation within magical ceremony. The manner in which I had drawn the Tourbillion also gave it the appearance of a brain stem. Jagged arrows of energy were flying off the vortex in all directions, like sparks. In fact, it had a distinctly electrical quality.
At that time I did not have any idea of the meaning of this image or what role it was signifying in my life. What I did realize was that it was numinous in nature, revelatory, and was signaling change. Of primary significance was the fact that it appeared to me “out of nowhere” so to speak. I had not at that moment connected it with any previous experience, real or in dream. Artistically, it represented a work that was authentic to my own experience, in no way derivative of outside art or imagery.
In my case, the Tourbillion became a persistent pressure on my identity and creative output that only culminated two decades later in the detonation of Pan Am 103, an experience I will return to later. During that earlier period of interaction with the Tourbillion, we continued to move closer in proximity to one another down that road. As the dynamics changed and evolved, I gained more and more information about the real meaning of the Tourbillion.
In retrospect, my artistic and numinous experience with this manifestation of subtle energy in Krylov Space affected every aspect of my identity. Professionally, I did not begin to grasp its significance to my work before studying it in a cross-disciplinary manner, a search that eventually led to Norseen and his theories. While experiences of visionary events are not uncommon in Western culture, they generally are not given much scientific scrutiny, unless they become psychotic.
6 J. G. Sprott, “electromagnetic spectrum chart”, http://sprott.physics.wisc.edu/lectures/radio/sld005.htm, U. of Wisconsin
---
04 BIOSEMIOTICS and DEATH SEMIOTICS
I had pointed out to John that his best examples of Reflexive Control described situations where external images became eclipsed by eidetic images of strong emotional content, i.e. the semiotics. A colleague known to Norseen’s Lockheed Semiotics Group, Alexei A. Sharov (also of Virginia Polytechnic Institute), had suggested in his papers that semiotic processes permeate the entire body. Certainly, some must show up as imagery in the mind. Of those, some might be considered broadcasts from beyond the individual. I wanted to know more about how he and his associates understood visionary and biological semiotics.
FIGURE 18: GENERAL SIGN TRIAD (BASED ON THE WORK OF ALEXEI A. SHAROV)
FIGURE 18: GENERAL SIGN TRIAD (BASED ON THE WORK OF ALEXEI A. SHAROV)
From Alexei A. Sharov: "One of the basic problems in bio-semiotics is understanding how 'something' becomes 'someone' Hoffmeyer (1997). In other words, what is the origin of subjectivity, or how a system can start interpreting the world? Action is the only possible predecessor of interpretation. In primitive organisms, interpretation is always reduced to some simple action. For example, the sound of a bat means 'fall down' for a moth, and a source of light means 'move here' for unicellular algae. Organisms also exhibit numerous spontaneous actions which are not induced by any external signal. The question is: what makes organisms perform all these actions? According to physics and chemistry, organism activity is predetermined in its structure. But this is only half of an answer or, better to say, not an answer at all because the next question is why organisms have this specific structure? Action and structure are two sides of the same thing which can be called 'organization'." The explanation of the origin of organization comes from the theory of evolution which in its most general form states that action and structure form a self-stimulating loop based on self-reproduction (Conrad 1983). As a result, action and structure are integrated into an organism. An organism can be viewed as an investor whose profit is self-production (Sharov 1992)...." 7
JOHN NORSEEN
As Sharov suggests, there are many, many forms of semiotics in the body -- anywhere that communication takes place...and this would establish semiotics for cell to cell communication and also for intracellular activities.
At some point each cell needs to know if there is life going on next door. It needs to find out if there is an answer to the beacon it sent out in search of some sign of ongoing life. In a plant, the point of growth is the apical meristem; it wildly probes out and the rest of the plant follows. It follows the tract of light, and of magnetism and other waveforms. It sets up semiotics for the following plant cells to align up with -- each in turn furnishing a semiotic link for the entire plant to follow. Each cell may or may not carry out a specific function, such as set up a flower or a thorn in its local vicinity. Semiotics is the communications that establish both the local and global FORM of the object.
Some SEMIOTICS are so important that they cause InFORMation to flow to them and sometimes InFORMation (INTENT) is so great that semiotics are drawn to them. Semiotics can make information conform to internal communications, or conversely, external information can make semiotics leap out to it. In life, some combination of both is always taking place. The Semiotics is seeking out information and information/INTENT is seeking out semiotics to establish links between and among properties.
Communication via semiotics and intent is probably the driving force of the universe concerned with life.
Accordingly, inside of our brains is embedded all the structures necessary for semiotics driven by information...and for semiotics sculptured and seeking out specific information to make communications hum.
Imagery is related to bandwidth. There is so much more information available in imagery and vision, so it covers a greater range of information utilization and access. Very often in the Bible and other religious texts, the message of the gods is carried into the minds of the faithful and even the non-faithful by Visions and Dreams…but it is in the unique language of the spoken word that INTENT is most powerfully conveyed.
God even described the word to convey his intent of God as Yahweh, which is basically gibberish. Not even the mind of man could Semiotically decipher all that is God...hence the calamity...to name God is to know God, to know God is to have the power of God...but to name God Yahweh is all man can do...therefore never knowing the full measure of God.
But man can fully name other things and thus have the power over them...and so the semiotic of speech is a very powerful thing. It isolates and deciphers all that imagery can provide.
But Duncan, the brain is also more than just vision and speech...it is also feelings and instincts and partial semiotics...bits and pieces of other transmission pathways, such as magnetic or balance or gravity or centripetal forces that we can convert into Semi-Semiotics....
So there are many semiotics to communicate with...some semiotics reach out for INTENT and in some cases INTENT forces a semiotic to form.
Why semiotics?? Semiotics allows for testing of the Future by encoding the past and transferring the present.
Semiotics lets the plant know if the cells next door are dead or dying and to reorganize the direction of resource usage. Semiotics is the Knock, Knock, Knocking on the door of the future...either to confirm prior knowledge, or to capitalize on novelty.
One more concept here. Just as you have some number of temperature sensors in your skin, so many per cubic centimeter, they altogether provide you with a sensation and perception of it being too cold, just right or too hot. Not all of the sensors are getting the same pieces of information, but in the aggregate they convey a life form to you: seek shelter, coolness, warmth, get a blanket...the information of temperature produces any number of semiotics, such as need a blanket imagery in your mind, that causes the rest of the body and mind to act, so you wrap your self in a blanket The information interacting with temperature sensors set up a sequence of semiotics that performed communications that resulted in you mustering enough intent to get up and wrap yourself up in a blanket, thus closing the semiotic loop. Closure allows you to become available for the next cycle of Semiotic -- INTENT information/communication/action -- resolution.
In our PSYCHE, we have all kinds of internal Semiotic Loops permanently and semi-permanently established in our souls; we can even grow new ones! But it is damn hard to extinguish one or get rid of one once we try it out.
Duncan...it is the semiotic that is the corridor for information to become intent, and for intent to become information, sometimes simultaneously. This is the ultimate yin/yang known to the Greeks as ‘Antinomy’. Antinomy is when something and its opposite operate at the same time, but with the entire system moving on to the next state.
Can you imagine the semiotics quandary at the time of death? None of the old patterns work anymore and only a burst into a new regime of semiotics will allow for the transfer of the life force into the next realm. You can bet that a Semiotic Sensor would go wild and point in a most interesting direction at the trip wire of death…
Just as we have sensors and transmitters for all other forms of communications… there must be a Sensor/Transmitter for the Death STATE…the INTENTIONAL TRANSMISSION OF DEATH.
DUNCAN LAURIE
After reading some of the papers from the Lockheed semiotitians that you have sent, it is clear that they have already begun developing a protocol well beyond that of mechanistic science, simply by including consciousness in their approach. Is this something unique to LM and the aerospace industry, or is it an approach that is worming its way into academic science? It makes me think that the weapon design world is already grappling with issues far beyond what the rest of the scientific world is willing to tolerate.
And going back a pace, "The notion of Umwelt was introduced by Uexküll (1940) 8 for a subjective world as it is perceived and modeled by an organism. Hoffmeyer (1997) 9 emphasized the activity of organisms in building their Umwelts. Recipes for building Umwelts are included in the genotype and are transferred selectively to subsequent generations. Thus evolution is not just a change in the shape of organs but rather a change in the semiotic relationship with the world. The major evolutionary trend is the selection in favor of more complex Umwelts that increase the semiotic freedom of the organisms. According to Hoffmeyer (1997), consciousness appears when an organism discovers that it is the builder of its own Umwelt. Because of this circular reference, humans obtained freedom to reinvent semiotic relationships with the world, which enormously speeds up the evolution of Umwelts." I am taking this out of context and shortening the arguments, but isn't this bio-semiotic theory very analogous to our discussion of radionics and art?
In our metaphor, the Umwelt is the way a culture views itself. This is reflected on a day to day basis as the art product of the culture; art equals passion plus structure. Because we realize in some sense that adapting a more complex Umwelt leads to more semiotic freedom, which I interpret as more consciousness, the collective mind of the culture invests in the production of art. The profit is an expanded Umwelt which forms a "self-stimulating loop based on self-reproduction", the self-reproduction here being in consciousness. This value can also be reflected in the literal value of the art, but not necessarily so and certainly is not the only reason for its value. In time, however, the culture recognizes the 'true' art of the era, as the valued Umwelt is revealed and accepted. Now when an artist contributes significant input (works) to the cultural Umwelt, someone becomes something, but what of the reverse? If you or I absorb the meaning of that Umwelt, doesn't a “something” now become a “someone” in our consciousness?
And isn't that transaction more or less exactly what takes place if a witness in a radionics box coupled with an intention results in a change of state in the Interpretant? And so, if we are describing a common semiotic or bio-semiotic occurrence, doesn't that in some sense validate radionics? Likewise, wouldn't we presume that the primary function of art is semiotic and radionic? This would seem to be the case in pre-literate societies and contemporary indigenous peoples that readily experience transformative, energetic output from their ceremonies and image creation?
----------------
I have been reading over Cleve Backster’s new book, Primary Perception 10 about his long term experiments in plant communications. I think his work that may be important in concretizing the Norseen Semiotic.
What struck me was the area of his research that investigated where the replication of his experiments with plants by others failed. As you probably know, other groups had difficulty replicating his work because they did not, in Backster’s opinion, achieve total automation of the experiments, i.e. they did not completely separate the plants from those in charge of the experiment. Already I am beginning to sense why. I see the semiotic formula, ORI, creeping in. The plants change from "I" to "R" for the person in charge of the experiment, looping them in without their knowledge. The experimenter becomes imbedded in the semiotic, an influence upon its predictive capacity. The emotional bias of the experimenter’s semiotics can alter the outcome.
In writing about one such replication failure, a plant’s reaction to brine shrimp falling into boiling water at a randomly selected moment, Backster states the following: “The plants were in a holding room seven days in advance of their intended use. They then bathed the leaves in distilled water. Any kind of experimenter contact with the plants prior to the actual experiment usage can compromise the experiment by allowing prior attunement between the plant and the researcher rather than the more subtle stimulus provided by the death of the brine shrimp.” The reader is left to wonder how a handler's familiarity with the plant may cause it to react differently to the death of the shrimp.
It occurs to me that within the relationship between plant and handler we potentially have a laboratory for examining the complex relationships between life form, semiotic and emotion or perception. At the core of the issue we have a plant interpreting an action, the death of the shrimp. When the experiment goes as planned; when no one is around; the cup filled with live shrimp tips over at a random time, and the plant’s voltage spikes as they die. It appears the plant "emotionally" experiences the death of the shrimp. But from a semiotic standpoint, the scalding water could be the object that the shrimp interpret by releasing a signal. The plant becomes a Representamen (R) between the death of the shrimp (O) and the scientist (I). There may not be emotional recognition of pain present in the ordinary sense in the plant, but only a registering of semiotics across the life death interface.
Even in the case where a plant appears to respond to the intention to do it harm, the circumstances may be viewed semiotically and not necessarily as the result of emotion. The intention to harm is clearly a signal interpreted by the plant. It has its roots in a human intention, but not necessarily an emotion. Perhaps, when the emotion isn’t clear, then the signal can’t be interpreted. That scenario would favor emotion as the primary perception. If the emotion is the object, the expression of that emotion, or intent, is the Representamen. The plant could be the interpretant of the intent, but not necessarily of the emotion. When the intent to harm the plant is genuine, the plant responds.
In the Russian video replication of this experiment (see The Secret Life of Plants 11), the plant reacts to a person who has previously harmed a plant, but does not intend to harm one now. It appears that the plant “feels” the previous murderous actions of the individual before it.
In this case again, to say the plant may be “feeling” the emotion of whatever is broadcasting the intent, could be incorrect. It could be that the intent is not something felt at all. It could be a semiotic feedback loop, whose whole purpose is to bring about a future change of conditions, i.e., plant murder. It strikes me that, in light of the NS, experiments could be devised that would clarify the extent to which the plant actually "felt" something or simply responded to semiotics within the environment.
Going a bit further, it might be possible to isolate a semiotic from something going on in the central nervous system, because it seems reasonably clear that the plant has some mechanism for recognizing symbols without the benefit of any nerves. This would also hold true for cells, which Backster also experimented with. With the proper semiotic perspective, we might be able to re-interpret Backster’s famous experiments in a wholly new way, and actually get his feedback or participation. Any way you look at it, framing these plant experiments in light of the Norseen Semiotic makes them scientifically more plausible. What changes is the manner in which we view emotion in relation to signal. The emotion behind the signal is like the amperage; it provides enough force to turn emotion into expression, just like it does in the art process.
When I hooked up my own plants in the same way and allowed them to generate signals that were processed into musical tones and phrases, I kept wondering whether their performances were the result of some type of induction, perhaps a sound wave moving the leaf, or whether the plants could actually create their own discreet signals and thereby play tunes on their own. Objectively, I found it hard to believe that my plants were capable of playing independent and conscious music, even of improvising though that is what it sounded like. I thought it must be plant elementals having fun, or something equally Theosophical. The plants made musical phrases on their own, but they played along only with certain types of music; at best, they seemed to improvise around the basic theme. In other words, their “music” didn’t sound mechanical. They sounded like they were creating their own musical structures in response to the structures that were being played for them. That is the impression of everyone that has heard the recordings. It certainly appears like an “emotional” reaction.
So, in Backster’s view, this would connote additional evidence for plant intelligence and feeling; but wait a minute. They didn’t respond much too thumping dance beats and other more mechanical forms of music. What they responded to was the kind of music I liked. They liked certain kinds of jazz; they loved Cajun & Zydeco; they even liked a local composer I knew. Maybe what was going on was that by responding to me, the one who watched them and gave them water, they were interpreting my positive or negative semiotic reaction to the music selections. Their apparent “emotional” response to the music was a form of induction, but not electromagnetic induction; semiotic induction.
FIGURE 19: LAURIE STUDIO – CLOSE-UP OF BIOSENSOR ATTACHED TO PLANT.
FIGURE 19: LAURIE STUDIO – CLOSE-UP OF BIOSENSOR ATTACHED TO PLANT.
Last fall, some friends who were making a local movie asked me to use my sensors to create a sound track for them that would represent the Spirit of Nature. They wanted this music to foreshadow certain scenes where something magical was about to happen. Previously, I had taken some classical pieces they liked and played them for the plants, and some terrifically blended interpretations resulted. However, because of copyright issues we had to go do something without prerecorded music.
It happened that the filmmakers were followers of the Youraba religion. They had a very well developed sense of the occult, and this included a belief that the totems of the Orishas in their private sanctuary at home were in a sense, animate.
This understanding being the case, I asked them to find out if the Orishas would consent to my using their totems as a sensor to extract the nature-spirit music for the movie. It is not that unusual in Youraba to make small requests of this kind. I had witnessed something similar in Youraba trance dancing ceremonies I had seen in New York, where the deity takes possession of the dancer for a short interval.
The request was granted, and my friends brought over their totems. Gordon Salisbury, our resident instrument designer, was able to find a wire sticking out of the wax effigies here and there, and set each on a metal plate for the second electrode. They proceeded to produce some enchanting music entirely on their own that was perfect for the film.
There was nothing biologically alive in the totems. Initially this fact and other experiments of a similar nature we made using rocks as sensors, made me wonder if what we were doing was something like Ghost Radio. In ghost radio, an RCA plug without connecting wires is put into an open mike jack, and one turns up the volume and listens for voices in the noise. But our signals, when processed, were subtle and appropriate to the intended usage. They also would “pattern” themselves to pre-recorded music on occasion. Here, biological intelligence or emotion does not appear to be a factor in the outcome; it appears instead to be semiotically driven by the intent of the interpreter. Proper scientific investigation would obviously be required to determine anything conclusive.
On the one hand, you can’t call the experience “totem feelings” or describe the electrical self-potential of the chemistry (if it existed) as a form of sentience. Of course, some spurious voltage is produced by the capacitance of the totem, but that doesn’t completely explain the harmonic order created by the time it leaves the sound processor, though some other variable might well. What could explain it is the semiotic relationship between the various intents focused upon the task. Clearly we had a Representamen, the totem, where the Orishas intent and the director’s intent and my and Gordon’s intent all converged. Here, the output was a specific type of acoustical structure, interpreted by all of us emotionally, and processed as musical phrase by the Harmonizer (a signal processor). But what is the object? The object, in my opinion, was the merged ideal “geometry” of all three interests that had a stake in the outcome. Of course, one must allow the Orishas’ intent to be considered as the “object” as well.
What also may have occurred is that semiotics were directly translated into “art” without the benefit of a human doing something physical to a medium. What do you think of that?
I find something fascinating about this in an experimental context. Potentially, an explanation involving subtle energy, Alfven Waves and ZPE, essentially the Norseen Semiotic, can both simplify and clarify the Backster experiment which has defied mechanistic analysis for so long. What we think of as emotion may not always be emotion, but a facsimile byproduct of another type of energetic discharge. It would be great if we could design some simple experiments with these things in mind and see what happens!
JOHN NORSEEN
You, the plant savior, became their ticket to survival so they patterned themselves to your semiotic value system. But what is the object? The object, in my opinion, was the merged intent of all three interests that had a stake in the outcome. Intent can be an Object, using itself as the Sign as well...and remember semiotics need not be passive; semiotics can be active. They are much more fun when they are alive, on the hunt for other Signs.
Think: Predatory semiotics. Sign as Intent, with Object being the focus of the intents (# of players thought focus). The Music produced by the focus of intent when bounced back from the other semiotics used, forms a Chamber of Interpretants and Representamen. Now your consciousness, with intents sweeping over the various objects, creates the linking mechanism within the virtual chamber, i.e. the music, the reverberation of the chamber.
Imagine this: you take two people into a cave and hum at various pitches. The chamber of tonal music is quite different than if you are in the same chamber hall with 100 people. Scale is important to semiotics...you are ramping down or pitching up the volume dramatically in your cavorting endeavors.
Back to emotion and the chakras; I asked Pribram: why are Broca and Wernicke areas only on the left side, pushing speech to the left hemisphere, and forcing an unequal distribution of emotion laden information onto the vagus nerve, away from interacting with the speech centers? Why did nature leave us with INEFFABLE gaps between emotional information and spoken language?
He responded simply that more "Blood" pumped out to the left side of the brain; yielding better nutrients; the better semiotic neurons are provided a better food source. The rest of the brain didn't get the fresh blood. There is also in here, I am sure, some of the clash of Jean M Auel's Clan of the Cave Bear, in The Origins of Consciousness in the Bicameral Mind, by Julian Jaynes. Too many left-handed warriors took a sword to the heart, and thus were born the Right Arm of Semiotics, the INEFFABLE, via emotions in the older brain. Also, add the understood semiotics via the internal delusional manifestation of talking to ourselves. But whom are we talking to… ourselves, or our gods?
Imagine an earlier man, much like a person today, who suddenly experiences Synesthesia sitting at the keyboard and Wham! I could smell the words, and the hum of the computer was blood red; this totally wiped me out… Wow, I am in the Elysian Fields, my battle armor is next to me, the short sword still in my hand, the blood is no longer running into my eyes. There is a beautiful woman holding my head in her lap, clothed in the finest softest silk… Then I wake up, a rower in a Phoenician trade ship. I can talk to myself; plot a way out of the belly of this beast. I can feel the sun on my face and the salt sea breeze, telling me the island I seek is not far off…and I shall find, I must find, the Golden Fleece of SEMIOTICS!
The experiments sound great. We must ensure that the TipOver events are indeed random, and that the INTENT and INTERPRETANT are isolated as best we can.
Experiment: Get a bag of seed, or better yet, two different brands of the same seed, and mix them, about 7 or so shuffles can constitute a fair shuffle. Now we purposefully pick music that each of us likes a lot, but is different from each other qualitatively as well as measurably. Let's say a 3-beat waltz versus your Cajun hyperstructures.
For the first tests, you play the good Interpreter. Bring in only good intent, food, water, sunlight, good soil, warmth, pH and your music. Then I come in and play the bad ecologist interested only in Alaskan tundra oil; screw the permafrost, my hemi needs it. When I play the music I like, I mess with the plants. I yell at them, let them dry out a bit, blow cold wind on them, etc. Next, we compare the measurements of your days and my days. Then we turn it around and measure; maybe we can develop a bunch of Neurotic herbs? Something like this would be cool.
Talk about subtle energy; we could measure the plants when you and I open an envelope and it dictates which of us is going to be nice or mean to the plants. Now, at that moment of the opening, the plants could count on either of us to be humane with respect to them. Only in our quiet minds, when we open the envelope, will each of us and the plants know subtly what is going to happen. Will the plants be able to know which of us will be the role player? Can the plants “KNOW” our assigned INTENT!!!
DUNCAN LAURIE
It turns out that in reading Backster, one of his biggest problems in obtaining scientific approval lay in the difficulty many groups had in replicating his experiments. In response, Backster points out that in many cases a fatal flaw was made: “They made it obvious that they were not following proper automation procedures. The plants were in a holding room seven days in advance of their intended use. Any kind of experimenter contact with the plants prior to the actual experiment usage can compromise the experiment by allowing prior attunement between the plant and the researcher rather than the more subtle stimulus provided by the death of the brine shrimp.”
It seems that any familiarity with a plant, or perhaps any sensing organism (that isn’t quite clear), has the capacity to be influenced by the observer, in an almost quantum mechanical way. I have observed this as well, as recently as Monday. Gordon and I were doing some equipment checks, and I had a large piece of volcanic rock hooked up to the RCC (Rate of Change Converter) and the Harmonizer. To see if it would react, I played some Mongolian Hoomi music. Immediately we hear from the rock a reaction that sounded like a partial entrainment to the music but was still confused. At one point, Gordon reduced the volume of the music, thereby rendering it less distorted. Immediately, the rock went right into phase with the regular beats of a twanging Jews harp.
FIGURE 20: UKAKO RADIONICS DEVICE
FIGURE 20: UKAKO
RADIONICS DEVICE
I kept replaying that section, and tried to record it. Later, when we changed the melodic parameters to better tune the rock's pitch to the music, the entrainment became incoherent again. We could not, through effort, get back to that pristine connection. This wasn’t a tight experiment, because I didn’t isolate the rock from acoustic waves or em, but it was interesting nonetheless.
We are also constructing a sensor array we tentatively are calling the Dead Souls Beacon. The “DSB” is an attractor that can be set up in the lab with no one around, isolated from em and wind, with both biological and electromagnetic sensors. Based upon the information you shared about what occurred at the listening posts on the submarines, it could potentially pick up semiotics from the floating dead going up and down Narragansett Bay. Because said dead ones are not unconscious, I propose leaving near the sensor a written sign containing Morse code, and an invitation to communicate via “hits” on the sensor that can be recorded as code and later translated.
A more elaborate, artistic response would be for said disincarnates to trigger biological sensors that would compose music via the Harmonizer. All this could be accomplished independently of anyone in or nearby the building. Will this set-up actually pick up a disembodied spirit? That remains to be seen, but it could investigate some aspects of Backster’s concerns for autonomy, particularly if the sensor material is handled properly.
We now have a variety of sensors: plants, rocks (including the ledge upon which the studio is built), fungal, egg, tissue, and cellular material to sample via Bridge or GSR technology. What remains is how to design these experiments? How do we model them in such a way as to reveal the nature of the signal under study? I believe that it is nearly impossible to completely eliminate the spurious influence of electromagnetic artifacts both within the area of the electrodes, and from the surrounding environment outside the electrodes. But say we give it a good shot.
Next, we have to eliminate the contamination of intention that exists on a subtler level that Backster talks about. Say we find a way to do that. Then, how do we test for or determine whether we have isolated a semiotic in a simplified state?
Here’s one idea. We try a radionic approach. We take a Polaroid of a plant sensor setup, go to another place with a radionic device like the UKAKO, that is free of dials, etc., and plop the Polaroid smeared with plant nutrients down on the UKAKO and push the transmit button, with the intent to remotely boost the plant's vitality. We see if there is a corresponding response in the plant via the electrodes. Could this approach be described as a semiotic transaction, in the sense we have been discussing?
JOHN NORSEEN
Do you have a QEEG or EEG box? The QEEG can do more analysis in the Wavelet and Phase analysis. If we take Pribram and the Russian work, it shows that human brain structure is an interferometer that uses Gabor Function (wavelet-codelet analysis) in Hilbert Space. So as the dead transition, they will pass through this Wavelet-Codelet space/time filter. If we can show on the EEG or QEEG any Wavelet-Codelet blips that correspond to other death information that intersect in time or location, then we have Trapped something.
FIGURE 21: KEY TERMS
FIGURE 21: KEY TERMS
Also, we should be showing the transition of hits or blips in that 7.0-9.0 Hz Earth waveguide region, with super-correlation at 10 Hz, where the being is aware of the end and is fighting/debating whether or not to go to the light. This "decision" corridor is a pulse of 10 Hz for some time. It then settles down in the earth waveguide during the transition from living to non-pseudo-living.
As you indicate, we need to provide some Semiotic that is attractive for a "soul" to want to manipulate as a communications mechanism. The simplest Morse code that I remember from memorizing the entire code is “...---...” or SOS, but based on Pavlovian open biofeedback, we don't necessarily have to have all the RULES in place. We can leave some of the how will it work to Adaptive Engagement. We may be able to leave the system open to adjusting to new rules from us and from our guests.
The NEXUS could be one rule; use the following signal or semiotic “...---...” as a cue on the sensors to initiate changes in direction or communication to another more feasible unit of communication. Either we pick another Semiotic, or allow our Guests to pick their semiotic of choice and communicate it to us. We need to allow the Guests to set some of the rules.
For instance, in one case we may allow Norseen with the QEEG head set on to be the Beacon Relay. We get his baseline 10 Hz reading and then look for spikes that also occur in other plant or rock recordings. We allow the Guest to pick among the three for the session. We see if we can get a Round Robin going. Guest Number One comes in and does a “...---...” on Norseen 's head and points to the Rock sensor. Guest Slice #2 goes to the rock, and then another pointer to all three in succession; Norseen, Rock, Plant.
Do you see where I am driving? Rather than just take a picture of a Guest, or show a change in an EM recording, we actually engage and play Comms tag, Semiotic Tag, with the visitors. Now try to explain how that series of events is concocted. The very Game-like nature of such a search betrays some deeper intelligence and communications pathways using the subtle energies.
My fingers are writing most of this response under a seemingly Dictation-like feeling. I am getting inspiration from a group of erstwhile energies that are willing to play Semiotic Tag with us....dance around the light...the 10 Hz boogey, and the SOS ...---... waltz!
FIGURE 22: UFO SIGHTINGS, WESTERN HEMISPHERE
FIGURE 22: UFO SIGHTINGS
WESTERN HEMISPHERE 12
P.S. Duncan, this map showing the concatenation of UFO sightings across the country and the world is what I was trying to describe to you about the Dead Souls Beacon....at different times in different locations, there are surges of deaths above some regular earth beat. And if you could record them and begin to sort them out you would see that there are definite patterns to how the dead show up around the earth. Like Carl Jung said when he went into his OBE, “I found myself floating quietly above Ceylon. I believe it to be the null zone, the dwelling point of those that would observe the earth.” A century later our graviton machines show that Sri Lanka (Ceylon) has the lowest gravity pull of any spot above the earth and that as the NS passes from life to life like some metempsychotic astronaut, then ZPE of the baton handoff across non-living to living to post living will show up on the Dead Souls Beacon much like these UFO activity charts. Remember, the Earth-Wide system must be able to understand earth-sized accessions and depletions of soul energies…the earth needs to know, in a system orientation way, if certain species are increasing or decreasing and the needs to balance the energy flows...therefore tapping the earth as it counts the NS is essentially what we are piggy backing onto.
DUNCAN LAURIE
I don’t know much about science, but everything I hear about what constitutes the substance of our existence is described in very object-driven terms; atoms, molecules, quarks, photons, even waves are all part of a vast machine-like assemblage. It can all be measured and weighed and sorted out until we get to Quantum Physics and the sub-atomic world, where suddenly things get murky. Here, perception influences outcome, but nobody defines perception. In light of the NS, perception is Interpretation, the missing ingredient of the mechanistic credo.
I suddenly perceive an object and by doing so, that object changes. Very common actually, we call it “love”. But for the sake of our discussion, it’s occurring at a very small level. An object, say a sub-atomic particle, is humming along in space very happy being non-living potential energy. Then my consciousness suddenly gives it a smack. At this point, a marriage occurs. Consciousness equals semiotic intent; I have directed my life force, my intelligence, my consciousness into the energetic structure of the particle, i.e., BioFusion. What now exists in the space previously occupied solely by the particle is a fusion of life energy and matter.
Artistically, what has occurred is that a material object that can be well defined has assumed the properties of a metaphor. The semiotics can react very differently with each and every signal that they encounter. Suddenly, there are no more “objects”, clean and simple, left in the universe that we can see and ponder. Everything man has touched has become contaminated with a hideous complexity and innuendo. Thus Backster cannot get clean reactions from his plants if there is even a trace of his consciousness contaminating the plant’s reactions. Even without contamination, we cannot possibly “Know” what that plant signal really consists of.
So, when we see or feel an Intelligence, UFO or Ghost or whatever it is that is potentially foreign enough to be beyond our imagination, you say our perception of it could be like synesthesia. My feeling is that the fusion of sensual data results rather in being metaphor or archetype, some “presence” we actually encounter. From the NS perspective, this archetype is the self-Interpretant in the semiotic. Its form completely transcends any mechanistic credo, and yet there it is, altering the outcome (i.e., metaphor) of things. As a semiotic, it grows toward life in the biological sense as it encounters other life-affirmative forces: light, heat, nutrients, etc. Those signals add to the semiotics power to create a Representamen of itself in the future.
When it comes to assessing the nature of such a process, the artistic commonalities are obvious. Take what you say about trying to communicate with an object. Isn’t that the essence of creating and appreciating art? Does true communication happen? Science would say no, because the infusion of semiotics into form as the molecules of paint or clay are being moved around would be considered mystical rubbish by many. But some of the work we have done here (that I don’t pretend to understand) speaks to this issue even more specifically. In wiring up rocks to access the electrical self-potential (in mille-voltages) given off by them (it’s often constant), we have an analogue to what you have said before:
“Eventually in space-time, a living object will attempt to communicate with a non-living object and the result will be some movement toward life in the inanimate object and some reconsideration of what life is in the living object with the implication that at some point, a third (Shadow) semiotic or God Object will manifest itself and provide a steering mechanism among the triad.”
When we put music on in the studio and then wire up the rock to respond, we were astonished to find that the rock would occasionally mimic the music. This feat was complicated by the fact that if we put a lot of attention on the fact of its occurrence, it would cease happening, very much like what Backster described with plants. So, was it a form of induction, or a consciousness phenomenon? Science won’t allow us to know, because even the possibility that the rock held semiotics that could reflexively respond to music would be considered heresy. So, as a result, the phenomenon becomes an art issue. Why? The phenomena have become metaphor. That is the very best explanation we can give it. The singing stone is an artistic metaphor for the existence of Gaia in the Earth. End of story, no proof necessary.
The Norseen Semiotic, whatever it is to science and engineering, is also the domain of metaphor, of nuance; placing it in art as well.
Yet the NS has made this dichotomy of interpretations a little more complex and paradoxical. It has also crossed the life and death barrier, and looked beyond. The NS introduces what you call the “shadow semiotic”, a motive force outside the agreed upon ingredients within the exercise. With a plant, it is easy to believe that some “life force” exists that is capable of responding to music, but a rock?
If the effect is not some type of electronic or mechanical induction, then it becomes a perfect miniature laboratory for exploring the nature of semiotics, especially the NS. I am in the process of setting up a strip chart recorder to monitor the signal, to see if the moments of musical coherence show up as a distinct pattern on the chart. What some real lab could figure out is whether or not this signal indicated the Universal Communication Structure you speak of, and if ZPE could be seen interacting with the rock molecules. It’s a great template.
It was with this in mind I began thinking about exactly what the NS would be like physically or perceptually, if it was to be “discovered” in a laboratory setting. Then my thoughts ran to Wilhelm Reich, who, as Freud’s youngest disciple, was the only Psychiatrist in that group, including Freud, to believe the libido was in fact an actual energy, and not just a metaphor.
I see parallels to the NS. A semiotic in the Peircean definition is still basically metaphorical, a language used to describe events. By contrast, the NS is basically energetic, though I admit to describing it in very metaphorical terms myself. One cannot fully circumvent its energetic existence; however, in whatever weird way it exists. That would suggest to me that physical linkage must exist in some form or manner that can be witnessed energetically in the physical world. [Outline of Peircean Semiotics, see Appendix]
That thought made me dig up some material on Wilhelm Reich’s bion experiments which I saw duplicated when I took Dr. Courtney Baker’s Orgonomy laboratory course. Here again, we are talking about life energy phenomena emerging at the life/matter interface. The experiments show life energy emerging from silica. The coincidences are just too many to dialogue. This fact has led me to assemble some internet sites for you to look at if you like where this is going.
JOHN NORSEEN
Duncan, I found out an interesting factoid that I was not aware of before…when a person dies, there are clusters of stem cells in the brain that survive for some time after death is pronounced…a last vestige of the person in amongst the pile of cells in a rotting corpse. So I have been thinking in overdrive...what if someone were to scoop up this pool of stem cells and augured them back to life in a full blown body, or at least a viable brain - would the NS work as challenged, or would some other form of sentience be at play.
Wow, this is really intriguing me…let's say that the NS remains intact, that you still have the I working in a new set of surroundings…so what makes this so much different from a grouping of cell like operations on the surface of a crystalline Rock. What if the stem cells were found to be functional in and amongst the other cell structures of the Rock? Would this not then be pre-life or proto-life? Or, along the same lines, many fellow researchers are taking brain cells, chiefly hairy piano neurons, and transplanting them alongside chips and resistors – not unlike the Ganesh rock sequences – and they are communicating and linking machines together to produce ART, as in the article I sent you. So if this is a further reduction of Chaos, then why can't a Rock surface become the Media for the biology, and intent, and the NS? Of course, it can; merely a scalar principle from non-live and entropy and chaos to lesser chaos, and less entropy and more order and complexity – driven by NS, ZPE and Alfven Wave Grid point locations.
DUNCAN LAURIE
Now that is interesting. Speaking of weird rocks, I just received some Vishnu Schist from Nevada, the exact same stuff of the Ganesh experiments. We’re deliberating over how to best hook it up. It seems like Dan Burisch (a renegade scientist from a secret government lab with a big web following, who first drew attention to this type of rock’s esoteric properties) held a microphone to the schist, of all improbable things, picked up sounds like human singing! There is that crossover to Reich’s bions again. (Reich pulverized rock into sand, heated it up, and out popped orgone, seen as blue light.)
You didn’t say how long those cells remain alive after the moment of death. Maybe they are there for months. If so, maybe we can make a cellular zombie. Why resuscitate a whole body? Why not put them in a Petri dish like the rat brain cells, and see if they can generate a pattern or a melody. Or let’s say the dead person had some favorite music; you could play that music for the cells and see if it wakes them up?
Now back to the stone. Why does it produce bions? Life force is imbedded in the rock and serves as an Interpretant for some type of cosmic process that takes place on planetary objects. The bion isn’t a cell, but it could contain ZPE and semiotic information. Maybe that is why the body needs minerals. I don’t think you need a cell in the rock surface to find the NS, if you buy the notion of bions. The cell conveniently provides DNA, or a biological semiotic data base with which to create linkage with other complex systems, such as the chips.
In the case of the rocks, instead of a DNA output, maybe you get a nested electrical pattern such as the electrical self-potentials that I use to generate sound. In the same sense that the rat neurons generate art and slowly move toward order, the rock bions occasionally pattern themselves electrically against the music. What the rat researchers don’t consider are all the experimental complications that Backster pointed out regarding biological communications. Human intent interacting in any way with the experiment causes serious drift as the process unfolds. To me, that is the Interpretant’s NS traveling upstream through R to O influencing the activity radionically.
FIGURE 23: VISHNU SCHIST OUTCROPPING
FIGURE 23: VISHNU SCHIST OUTCROPPING
JOHN NORSEEN
I had a sudden extreme urge to answer this On the Spot response of yours with the following comments: And the Bible says to build upon the Rock...maybe there is some literal truth there.
The rock provides the best supporting structure for the NS to form biologically. The Rock provides the necessary crystals, the solid foundation basis, the surface exposure, the electrical properties, etc., etc., that soil, or beach sands alone could not. So, just as it takes 49 days for the structure of the Pineal Gland to get to the point where it can juice out DMT and the soul molecule is distributed in the brain, maybe the Vishnu Schist (great name isn't it) is like the Pineal Gland, it allows for all the right properties to be aligned and Juiced Out, and maybe formed in the earth's electromagnetic history with all the right Alfven Wave grid patterns and other ZPE transfer qualities that the NS requires when looking for a home for the soul…maybe this Vishnu Schist is the right Rock of Life.
I am also becoming convinced that the Nitrogen molecule is the Interpreter of the NS in the brain...everywhere I look at soul-like activity in the brain the molecules involved all resonate around the special properties of the N molecule. Maybe there is a relationship to how biological molecules, and the N molecule in particular, lay out in relationship to the Ganesh activity of the Vishnu Schist…..Keys to unlock the Earth's secrets of the universe, via the rock into the biological system for further elaboration in time/space.
-------------------
You wrote “The value of a deeper contact with reality, the environment in which semiotics inhabit is at the least, circular, and most likely multi-dimensional. How does that explain rocks that sing and plants that cry?”
Wow, I was just now describing how I felt compelled to write the words to you in a playful way. I talked about the deeper energies (deeper contact with reality), and the circular, multidimensional semiotics (the round robin semiotic tag) and the souls and rocks that sing and the plants that cry? (the brain, the plant and the rocks, measured by EEG, etc...)
Once again, it is like I am dictating a response to you from somewhere that anticipates what your next message is. I answer the next message with the ending of the last prior message. The answers we may be seeking will show up at the front end, or tail off, of a prior/next message. Or another way to look at it, we may be getting the answers or snippets and slices of the earlier or follow up signals. SEE, already they are playing TAG with us!!!
7 Sharov, Alexei A. , “Towards the Semiotic Paradigm in Biology”, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 1997, http://www.ento.vt.edu/~sharov/biosem/txt/tosemiot.html
8 Uexküll, J. von, “The Theory of Meaning”, Semiotica, 1940 (1982), 42(1), 25-82.
9 Hoffmeyer, Jesper, Signs of Meaning in the Universe, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
10 Primary Perception: Biocommunication with Plants, Living Foods and Human Cells. Anza, CA: White Rose Millennium Press, (www.primaryperception.com), 2003
11 Green, Walon, dir., The Secret Life of Plants, Paramount Pictures, distributor, 1979.
12 Hatch, Larry, U UFO Database, http://www.larryhatch.net/WESTHEMI.html ( Offline as of July 2010. Sept 2006 snapshot on archive.org
---
05 SEMIOTIC BATTERIES
DUNCAN LAURIE
At one point early on I was having a problem with the overlapping of your terminology. Semiotic was beginning to mean too many things at different times and contexts. Let me drop back a step and address this again.
Instead of semiotics, we could just say everything is frequency and wave-form and other forms of energy and never even get into signals and symbols. So why do we need semiotics?
My sense is because symbol and signal happens to be the way our human perception and communication functions and so they are important. If a semiotic is a form of information, meaning literally the form information takes, then we are getting somewhere.
Information is all frequency and waves, etc. until the mind gives it a form, which we are calling a semiotic; is that it? If so, then there is the matter of intent, call it our attention. Intent remains formless; it is the life force, the God, the Soul in all that is born and dies. Intent is that which becomes reduced by association to various drives and responses to things seen and unseen. This intent shapes frequencies into semiotics so it can reflect upon them, interpret them and communicate them to others.
Now, you say the semiotic is like a copy machine, grinding out duplicates for distribution, which are periodically revised and sent out again. Now they are acting like what we know of information. The difference being, some transmittals/copies contain more life force than others. Intent is amplified by life force. When a large presence of life force impinges upon a semiotic structure, the structure is affected.
You have given me a clue to another attribute of a semiotic, the ability to store and release information and/or energy. This could also be the ability to resist or to regulate information flow as well; a true “form”. By God, now it's an appliance!
Consider art as another type of semiotic appliance, one designed to carry sacred and cultural information beyond the merely mechanistic or pragmatic. Does this function qualify Art as a rarified technology, where symbols are combined to allow the underlying forces they symbolize to resonate into new semiotic constructs, new forms of awareness and intent on the planet?”
I was hoping to elevate the discussion of semiotics to a higher purpose beyond its militaristic implications. I kept wondering where soul, emotion and love fit into the cold reality of semiotics. They didn’t seem to have much of a role in the business end of it.
JOHN NORSEEN
The Sign or Symbol (the Semiotic) consists of the Object. An object requires certain attributes or components in order to be of any meaning --- there must be a Representation or Representamen of the Object...this could be one of the interpretations of the symbol...or a copy, or an internal reflection of itself. Then there must be an Interpretant.... The Interpretant can be the object itself, or some aspect of the symbol itself.... Only when you have S=O as function of I x R do you have a Semiotic that is a basic Sign/Symbol as Semiotic.
Now we get into all the other exciting things that you VERY ACCURATELY DESCRIBE and DEPICT in your summary email...INTENT is when a Semiotic causes another semiotic to be created.
FIGURE 24: ORANGE WINDSOCK
FIGURE 24: ORANGE WINDSOCK
Let me use my favorite example of a passive semiotic...the Orange Windsock. I am a pilot in a plane at 1000' on a clear day. I wonder how I should land. I look down and what catches my eye -- the ORANGE WINDSOCK. Now what is this Windsock...it is a semiotic… It is a sign that tells me that if I pay attention, if I invest Interpretation energy, that I will get something useful that will satisfy my Intent to Land. The Windsock is both passive in that it is occupying some space and time but when I lock onto it, it suddenly releases, free of charge, all of its information for me to use in an intentional way...so it is not only passive. It is not seeking me out, but it is very ACTIVE in freely exposing all of its S = O x I x R to me once I become aware of it. I can swiftly and very economically locate on my map the location of the windsock or picture in my mind's eye the location of the windsock onto the mental imagery of the area I am flying over. And this notation of location of existence of the windsock is me making a Symbol of the Semiotic...If I refer to my map or to my mind's eye, I can rapidly call up a representation of the INFORMATION that was communicated in the last Interconnection between me, the pilot, and the viewed windsock. Each time I look at the windsock, I see a Sign or a Symbol or a Semiotic that updates me on the Information emanating from the Semiotic. I can immediately know that the wind is blowing at 35 mph by the way the windsock is let out, and I can tell the direction into the wind by looking at the pointer aspect of the windsock. I can tell if the windsock is new or battered and can interpret the condition of the field, and information about the amount of care of the landing surface. So, in an instant, a Semiotic of an orange Windsock can provide me, the pilot, with Immense amounts of information and intentionally, for my action, it provides me with a portfolio of past and present information and guides me into a successful negotiation with the future.
Now let's say that this is a very Duncan Lauriesque Windsock and it is able to realize that it has just been spotted by the pilot flying at 1000 feet above. Somehow, this windsock can detect that it is being “Interpreted”, and this Windsock uses a Battery to allow it to Glow Ultra-Orange and to turn on landing lights and to announce the name of its location and to encourage the pilot to land. Now what is going on here...This is still a Semiotic, but it is a very active, planned and surging source of information...It is intriguing and is attempting to attract the Information, Intent and Interpretation of the pilot. Now this semiotic is setting up a Feedback Loop with the Interpreter, which means that it is somehow trying to form a communications loop and a semiotic to semiotic function.
Taken a bit further, this windsock also turns on a Radionic Waveform that locks onto the engine of the pilot and the mind of the pilot, and interprets that pilot's life-force and seizes the Intentionality parameters of the pilot and simply directs the Pilot to land -- in this extreme case, The Orange Windsock is a very ACTIVE SEMIOTIC that transmits and captures INTENTIONALITY of other semiotic structures and forces information of the past and present into certain aspects of the future.
Duncan, this is exactly what you are describing when you describe ART. Some forms of ART are so persuasive that they capture the intentionality and make something happen. At the very least, ART causes a notation in the mind's eye, and sets up a potential intentionality and information fluctuation.
Semiotic Batteries can be set up by Cultural aspects; sometimes it is just the number of times you see something before it begins to resonate. There are studies that it takes 30xN to make something habit forming in our brain. If I don't see an average semiotic 30 or more times I may not set up a relationship or interpretation linkage...But then maybe something will just hook on to me...with some strange Radiation sensation...this is RADIONICS that is causing the resonance and active Interpretation…or more likely CAPTIVE resonance.
FIGURE 25: RICHARD J. REYNOLDS III (LEFT) AND AYMON DE ROUSSY DE SALES (RIGHT)
FIGURE 25: RICHARD J. REYNOLDS III
(LEFT) AND AYMON DE ROUSSY
DE SALES (RIGHT)
The power of what you are doing is setting up a Flow of Semiotics to the Interpreter. But then when it is registered that there is a semiotic flow, the pilot is noticing the windsock or vice versa the windsock is aware there is a pilot overhead...then voila, a Radionic Battery is set up…or a Radionic Loop that force drives the Semiotic interpretation of each other. And the interpretation then enters another stage...the relationship of a pilot to the windsock. Or a person to Duncan Laurie machine becomes obvious to another person...or to another Radionic Channel...and now the Semiotic condition can GROW...Three and then Three Hundred Thousand…All interlaced in a flow of Interpretation, Symbol, Sign, Representation... And then let's say that another member of the Future is attracted to the Semiotic Action...but rather than link by resonance there is a need to change the Representation of the Action from that of music to that of Smell...or to Gravity or to Affection. It is in the mystery of Chrysalis that Representamen can reach out to other Semiotic Concepts. This is that special mental phenomenon where you See with Smell and Hear in Color, Taste shapes...Synesthesia. And it is here where the Dimensions can intersect and release or dump or transmit information as an Intentional purpose, such as the Death/Life channel which we have discussed so much.
As I think back to Aymon’s article 13 you sent me on his feelings upon encountering the high priest in the Mexican temple pyramids...you said about that experience: “…the life death bloodletting slipped into the mental realm of the interpreter, the past into the future, by the radionics of the temple, the pyramid producing a Representation that could be picked up by the ritualized mind's eye of the interpreter. The ancient priest turned on a semiotic battery and transmitted a representation that could be picked up in the future by a mind transfixed in that chamber of the pyramid……”
So you can clearly visualize that Semiotics can move across time. Semiotics may be the literal force of the past that ensnares the future using symbols as signs for interpretation of various representations, for the active release of information to intentionally cause a linkage between and/or among an infinite number of semiotics structures. Art is the purposeful linkage of semiotics throughout time. Radionics is the purposeful configuration of semiotics between interpreters. Radionic Art is the purposeful communication of Semiotic Intent. PUMP UP THE VOLUME
FIGURE 26: PHOTOS BY MIT RESEARCHER, CORY LORENZ, OF METAL PARTICLES SHAPED BY A MAGNETIC FIELD, RESEMBLING PUEBLO POTTERY DESIGN
FIGURE 26: PHOTOS BY
MIT RESEARCHER,
CORY LORENZ, OF
METAL PARTICLES SHAPED
BY A MAGNETIC FIELD,
RESEMBLING PUEBLO
POTTERY DESIGNS 14
I am only trying to help refine the understanding of what semiotics is all about. Peirce wasn't finished with his concept of semiotics when he concluded in the Sign of the Three...the Object, the Representamen and the Interpreter. In fact, if you look at his personal writings and notations, there is every indication that he was about to draw the conclusion that the Sign as Symbol served an Active Purpose. And that is what I am trying to do for this effort. The ACTIVE PURPOSE of Semiotics is to Modify and Communicate with the Future – this means INTENTIONALITY. The Basis of the Universe is Information that via Semiotics can be vectored resulting in Intentionality. Radionics is a powerful form of communication of semiotics – hence intentional information, capable of transfiguring the very nature of semiotic structures, to cause the Interpreter to intentionally understand the meaning (the sign/symbol) of the Object or its Representative legacy.
Duncan, a Graphic that depicts Sign (subsuming symbol) as Object, a representation of the object, to include mirror image or internal manifestation, essence, and Interpreter (not bound by any material dimension) is what is Resonance. The form of resonance…passive, active or radionic…is what makes the Sign, which is ART – transcending time and space and mind.
Given this...as we begin to control the resonance of semiotics...the radionics of ART...we can begin to shape the Intentionality of FUTURE MIND.
We are literally playing around with the SEMIOTIC KEYBOARD of Perception. YOU ARE OPENING UP THE NUANCE OF INTERPRETATION OF INFORMATION.
DUNCAN LAURIE
In the paragraph that ends with "PUMP UP THE VOLUME", you speak of semiotics of the past ensnaring the future. In this regard, you also speak of the linkage of semiotics. We discussed over the phone one time how art links semiotics that hadn't previously been linked before, increasing their impact and energy upon society. When you say, "Radionic Art is the purposeful communication of Semiotic Intent", I'm getting a little confused. How does this differ from ordinary experience? Meaning, what differentiates the "art" experience from any other semiotically structured and engineered process like those Sharov describes in biology and genetics? Also, if you remember Terrence McKenna, he was always talking about a future event that cast its shadow back into the past, producing an event corridor that pulled energy into line with a future outcome. Certainly this seems like a semiotic transaction in the sense you are describing.
You then make a very unusual interpretation of resonance that I did not comprehend very well. It seemed to connote a conjugate form of a Sign, a template or geometry within the sign, that you called a "...mirror image or internal manifestation, essence..." that is responsible for producing the Sign.
Meaning what, that the conjugate sign is a resonance that is released by the sign through the active enquiry of the interpreter? Meaning, I suppose, as these semiotics are pumped into minds, the more these “virtual” resonances take control of the host’s attention influencing their behavior?
JOHN NORSEEN
You ask great questions...the kind that linger and persist in my mind and I keep biting away with bits and pieces of the answer that I want to give back to you…to help you see in your mind's eye the tantalizing panoply that you have created in my mind about semiotics, and what makes up semiotics, and that gives a definite conceptual answer for you to use.
We have discussed the characteristics of a Semiotic Sign. It must have an Object, a Representation, and an Interpreter...but the semiotic must also have the following for us to make full use of the concept of structure impacting with brain structure to bring the future into focus…or the past to bear on the present or future.
A semiotic must allow for some estimate of the whole form from which it comes or is derived. For instance, the great art of the world, the Michelangelo statues or the Mona Lisa, are at one moment all that it can be to represent itself...this Wholeness of Form differs from semiotic to semiotic...it leaves us, the interpreter, in many cases saying, I want more or what else is missing. But in great ART, the semiotic is the underlying complete form...the form of complete InFORMation.
Semiotic must also provide Aesthetic and the value circumscribed by Aesthetic. Now Semiotics is species dependent. And while it may cross species, the usefulness of cross species semiotics is the ability of the different brains to capture the aesthetics of the semiotic. A sign or a symbol to an Eagle or a Worm may not be the same value to a Human or a Dolphin. In this case, it is the Brain and the learned value of a Form or a semiotic that makes it special to the species or not. In many cases a Semiotic totally bypasses a brain and never engages in interactive interpretation.
Semiotics is subject to genetic manipulation. There are very strong experimental findings that show that Semiotic Aesthetics and Estimation of Form Wholeness is subject to genetic variation. For example, testing of primates with tokens exchanged for items of food…such as a dry biscuit, or juicy fruit cause the Token, the Semiotic, to be the cause of jealous physiological responses…increased blood flow, constriction of blood vessels, visual concentration, defensive body posturing, and directed attention to rearranging a prior interaction between token…and food item…and future relationship activities with handlers and other primate animals.
For example, a leader male monkey when shown a token and only a biscuit will exchange the token for the food item in a particular group pecking order. But if only a short while later, another male monkey, lower on the dominance order is offered a choice of exchange for the token of the same kind of biscuit or section of plump juicy grapes, will immediately take the fruit and attempt to hide it or eat it faster than the ability of the lead male monkey to change the results of the primary exchange. The male leader monkey will go wild if he sees that the lesser male got a more VALUABLE or AESTHETICALLY pleasing Semiotic for the token.
Therefore it is permissible to conclude that Semiotics contain a vector of Aesthetics to go along with some value estimate of the whole form. For example, if one token is exchanged for ten grapes and another token fetches 15 grapes...the same type of brain interaction, species-dependent response takes place, in an attempt to equalize or optimize the AESTHETIC and Whole Form value of the Semiotic...wherein the Token Semiotic takes on or shares the inherent value of other future linked semiotics...first, the biscuit, then the grapes, then the number of grapes and so on. So SEMIOTICS allows for VALUE and AESTHETICS and NOVEL LINKAGES of SEMIOTIC structures to structures in the environment and in the species-specific make up of the Brain as semiotic Interpretant.
It is important to realize that a Semiotic consists of a raison d'etre…a complete form. It is this AESTHETIC WHOLE that delineates one semiotic or one sign/symbol from another. In my back yard I cut down a whole patch of very tall weeds, but I didn't cut them all at the same angle, or in some cases all the way through. Accordingly, they died from lack of water, or sunlight or production of chlorophyll, but all in different patterns.
So what was it in the weeds that caused me to look at them now some two weeks later? They are brown or desiccated or dead in different patterns per each plant. They all either tried or couldn't fend off death, but at different patterns of the completely whole Weed that they had been...it is obvious by looking at the dead patterns that the weeds tried to get Healthy and to restore themselves to a prior PATTERN of Wholeness.
Duncan…they tried to become the AESTHETIC WHOLE, the SEMIOTIC...but failed. IT IS SO OBVIOUS that Structure itself and structure with a sense of wholeness and value…the AESTHETIC is where Semiotics becomes life. Now if I were to arrange the weeds in a vase with some food coloring, I would be attempting to salvage the semiotics and infuse them with new SEMIOTIC AESTHETICS...to preserve them in death semiotics…as an INTENTIONAL ART FORM…A NEW AESTHETIC, for REPEATABLE TRANSFORMATION OF AESTHETICS INTO AN UNDERSTANDING OF A PAST EVENT or TABLEAUX for FUTURE SEMIOTIC INTERPRETANT WHOLENESS OF FORM VALUATION, THAT WILL CAUSE SOME DEGREE OF INTENTIONALITY and interaction of brain structure with semiotics to change the future...such as in the mind of a person looking at the vase and the preserved weeds, now food-colored, some time in the future from now.
The weeds in the vase represent SEMIOTICS and VALUE, past and present and future due to INTENTIONALITY, where intentionality is subject to BRAIN STRUCTURE and INTERACTION with a Semiotic interpretant.
NOW this entire vector of aesthetics and wholeness of form can be reinforced and made to occupy a greater degree of Brain INTERACTION by means of RADIONICS. Let's say that when the vase with the food-colored weeds is touched by a human hand…sensors in the vase will convert the hand touch into a played recording of what the weeds are, a brief history and time they were placed in the bottle...and seeking a continuation of interactive semiotics, the recording asks the person assumed to be part of the finger touch to smile for a picture to be taken.
Now this picture of the person that touched the vase can be interpreted by the semiotic database underlying the table that the vase is on. And using Artificial Intelligence and Logic software, the vase, the flowers and the person can begin to create a Semiotic Exchange over some time period.
The SEMIOTICS can even begin to explore SYNESTHESIA, wherein the vase of colored weeds, now having some understanding of the person that is touching the vase and is near the table is a young man or older woman or other, can using explorative interactive radionics in synesthesia, send out Semiotic Brain Waves that cause the person to Smell what the weeds could smell like...or could shape the semiotics to cause the person to feel all warm and mellow inside by helping release neuro-chemicals geared to pain relief, pleasure hormones...the release of Oxytocin for example.
See Duncan…Semiotics is so much more than just a word or a picture or an event...it is a structure of communications by which VALUE and WHOLENESS OF FORM, and PREDICTION or CAUSATION of Future FEELINGS and MEMORIES CAN BE INTENTIONALLY CREATED, within species or across species, based on the interaction of semiotics with brain structures.
Hopefully this shows how the structure of Semiotics is inherently tied to how the brain interprets inFORMation.
Now as we have discussed, RITUAL and PRIOR MEMORY, and INTENSITY, and RADIONIC POWER, to include SEMIOTIC BATTERIES for remote instantiation of semiotics over time and away from online semiotic power sources can be added. WE MAY want to put certain semiotics into a package with a semiotic battery, and turn on certain sections of the brain later on when perhaps we are in a location where the semiotics we seek do not exist...or over time using semiotic batteries to act as Semiotic MEMORY or triggers of new linkages to form new AESTHETICS or values.
So now the Semiotic Diagram contains the following…an Object, an Interpretant, a Representamen (remember the dead weeds…they were trying to restore themselves to some internal vision of the representation of what they were, but could not complete), an Aesthetic value…an Intentionality vector, a structure for RADIONIC resonance, a subtle form for future BATTERY Powered resonance – MEMORY, and the ability to INTERACT with future INTERPRETANTS by SEMIOTIC LINKAGE, wherein a Sign/Symbol can become intrinsic with another Sign/Symbol, thus sharing the semiotic resonance.
As you can see, SEMIOTICS is the structural mechanism by which a simple form of communication can become more complex…can link into different and future brain structures and can carry and convey the value of past into future forms and values. SEMIOTICS is indeed how the PAST becomes known to the present, and how the FUTURE is CREATED by Signs and Symbols of the past, sometimes with INTENTIONALITY and sometimes just by WHOLENESS OF FORM. Within SEMIOTICS, ART and RADIONICS are crucial elements to insert value from one structure to another.
DUNCAN LAURIE
Go back to your metaphor of the wasp shadow and scream causing reflexive control of the personality. We begin with Norseen describing how his young daughter's scream and the shadow of a hornet caused him to throw down his crutches in complete fear and run; point being that total control was taken of his mind and body by the force of those semiotics. Norseen explains: the semiotic hits the amygdala portion of the brain, releasing the fear patterns, which overwhelms consciousness. He goes on to say that a similar pattern can be released via a drug, a signal, a musical code, a visual…anything capable of pressing the right button…and that response superimposes over the immediate circumstances. Point being: it is a potential weapons system, waiting to be fully developed as a psi-war SDI. Further point being; the signal can also be released by Art.
In an examination of the tools of radionics in light of Norseen semiotic theory, brain function and art, the following points emerged throughout our conversations: As radionics is a method of transmitting intention (information) into energy or form, one can say that art that generates emotion in the viewer is radionic. Art also links the resonances of previously unaligned semiotics, creating new metaphors through which we examine ourselves. Art resonates certain patterns in the brain semiotically, which we experience as emotion.
Norseen adds a technical note to this process when he states “the knobs and dials of the radionic device are in fact Lyapunov Functions. We pull up a control board in our mind, a kind of mental map of what we envision working upon. Then, we create a Representamen of this control board vis-à-vis the radionics device or art process, and project this Representamen into it. We then use the device to dowse a direction for our intent to follow. In one case, this is a radionic treatment and in the other case it is art.”
JOHN NORSEEN
Duncan, you ask how we can measure intentionality. One way is used by the folks at Princeton. They place measurement devices of brain activity in locations of large numbers of people that are interacting over a third semiotic, and not mentally aware that they are being monitored...such as a movie theater. At different points in the movie, a question or form is presented or suggested to the audience, and the brain sensors are analyzed to see if they correspond to any standard semiotic logic pattern or sequence.
So while the brain analysis can show…here is where the explosion took place in the movie...the audience brain scan shows the response to the explosion in the movie…there is at the same point in time a semiotic shown. Such as a terrorist face...given that the explosion is a marker, the brain scan that follows may actually show that everyone in the theater is thinking of some similar intentional act, either past, present or future. By linking into these test semiotics, one can begin to generate a forecast of the NON-COGNITIVE awareness or sensitivity of groups of people to future INTENTIONAL EVENTS. For example, after the explosion, there could be NON-CONSCIOUSLY presented, using various Laws of Just Noticeable Differences and cognitive versus non-cognitive sensation/perceptual calculations, an assessment of the future, such as what will be the three or four or seven letter lotto number tonight at 7 pm. If the crowd at large internally focuses on the semiotics listing 911, or 0911 or 0000911...one can get a very uncanny feeling that somehow the lotto that night has somehow been influenced with intentionality from the mental semiotics and brain structure resonance of a large number of people...that indeed, the power of semiotics and brain structure resonance can lead to intentionality and focus of directed action and behavior in the future...that the past can cause the present to flow into the future.
13 The Fifth Sun by Aymon de Roussy de Sales, describes his bizarre experience on the pyramid of Teotihuican, Mexico in 1961 with Josh (R. J.) Reynolds III, Philip Lamantia and Helen DuFresne; Borderlands Science Magazine
14 Lorenz, Cory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003, http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2003/ferrofluid-0205.html
---
06 ART and SEMIOTICS: THE TOURBILLION
DUNCAN LAURIE
I spent a few hours today bringing my daughter’s class to visit the studio of a professional photographer friend whose hobby is the camera obscura. He can turn his whole studio into an experience of flowing images of the outside world washing across his walls, as though you were standing inside the camera bellows itself. This effect is accomplished via a special custom made lens that focuses the outside imagery against his studio wall. As I sat back and watched the streets and buildings of Providence turned upside down, it struck me what an extraordinary invention this must have seemed in 300 BC when first discovered by the Chinese. Literally, it was the first cinema.
Under good resolution, the specter of life carrying on in the streets below us, with miniature cars driving overhead and stick-like figures walking in and out of buildings upside down, the camera obscura managed to convey a startling sense of organic life, albeit of a shadow world. Unlike a film, events were unfolding in real time without editing. Nothing could ever be repeated in exactly the same fashion. This unique time signature made me grasp at the images and somehow seek to retain them. They created an unfamiliar kind of nostalgia, which simultaneously seemed to be very meditative.
FIGURE 27: ILLUSION: FIND THE WORD “LIAR” IN THE IMAGE.
FIGURE 27: ILLUSION:
FIND THE WORD “LIAR” IN THE IMAGE.
We also spent some time examining the inside of an old bellows studio camera, which is basically just a small camera obscura. Then my friend mentioned how the eye itself is essentially a camera obscura, and I immediately found myself floating in the Norseen Semiotic. Looking at the shadow world on the wall, I began pondering the Representamen and how far it has come in dominating our lives. Before the camera obscura, the only Representamen were shadows or artworks bound in time, static images on walls or molded into three dimensions. Suddenly, with the camera obscura, the imagery began moving across the walls and ceilings like living things. Like the NS, they are composed of both the living and the non-living. Life is what makes them move, but in spite of that they are still only a facsimile of it. That being said, we should ask how much life do the images hitting the back of our eyes contain? Whatever the answer, as they penetrate deeper into the brain they are copied again, who knows how many times. In so doing, what have they become, the reality the images represent, or a distorted illusion?
If all of our senses operate in this semiotic fashion within our nervous system, then it is hard to find out where exactly the “life” fits in. We sense life in the moving objects around us, in the surfaces we touch and the patterns we see and hear. Yet, what we take into our brain from outside is purely the representations of that life force, unless we consider the implications of the Norseen Semiotic. Correct me if I am wrong, but if we don’t draw some “life force” in with the semiotics from the outside world, then are not our perceptions no better than an elaborate line of code?
I began thinking again about my twenty year involvement with the Tourbillion, that vision of the whirlwind of fire I experienced beginning back in 1978 or so, that kept replicating itself in my life in so many ways for the next twenty years. First it was through art; then through direct manifestation in my life and finally through death via Pan Am 103.
In retrospect, the Tourbillion appeared to be a type of living semiotic that entered my consciousness from a super-conscious realm. It carried with it both information and future prognostications. Initially, I thought of it as an archetype of the Self, in the Jungian sense, and that model worked just fine for integration purposes. Now that I have become familiar with the NS, I am tempted to re-examine that interpretation.
I know that the Tourbillion visions interpenetrated my conscious and subconscious mind for the first ten years in many odd ways until it culminated in a physical, real world manifestation of itself as a burning landscape along both sides of the ancient, sacred road from Coba to Tulum in Mexico. All along the road peasants were burning the trees and brush, and as the road turned, the fire with its whirling flames of smoke appeared perpetually straight ahead. That event was just the beginning of the metaphorical overlay that occurred on that trip. Most important symbolically, the Tourbillion had come full circle from numinous image to accomplished fact, and with it, I suppose, followed my understanding of its meaning.
FIGURE 28: ROAD FROM COBA TO TULUM, MEXICO
FIGURE 28: ROAD FROM COBA TO TULUM, MEXICO
FIGURE 29: DUNCAN LAURIE “THE ROAD FROM COBA TO TULUM”. PAINT AND LEAF ON CARVED GLASS.
FIGURE 29: DUNCAN LAURIE “THE ROAD FROM COBA TO TULUM”
PAINT AND LEAF ON CARVED GLASS.
When I think of the Tourbillion in semiotic terms today, I think of it as a specific form of powerful information that produced a profound energetic transformation in my life. If a bullet had gone through my body I could measure its effects in damaged tissue, in loss of blood and vitality. The Tourbillion was like the reverse of that metaphor. Every time it passed through my consciousness aspects of my life became energized that were formally dormant. Here, an image in my mind that was only information, i.e., mass-free, without motive force like a bullet, was responsible for releasing enormous amounts of energy that I was able to effectively benefit from in multiple, complex ways for many subsequent years. I would say now the Tourbillion was a semiotic of the life force. Since the life force is for all intensive purposes invisible to man even though it animates him from within, to understand it or communicate with it symbolically requires a representation.
For all intents and purposes, this mass-free moving image in my personal Krylov Space, with no apparent physical motive force, nevertheless released a powerful and sustained stream of energy into my mind and body for many years hence. As the energy worked its way through the dark areas of my psyche, it liberated images and feelings that became the substance of my evolution as an artist. Beyond that, it effected a therapeutic inclination. The energy released into my psyche was like a boar digging up old roots. All types of negative attachments were pried loose: addictions, emotional dependencies, unresolved beefs and burdens, and eventually an existential longing for contact with something beyond “me;” ironically, given the circumstances.
Anyway, the connection between my material and Norseen’s today is that as I experienced the semiotic of the Tourbillion and it began to open me up, my consciousness became far more fluid and adaptable to understanding visions, ecstatic contact, cosmic consciousness, etc. --- more bandwidth as Norseen would say. If the NS can also be characterized as a state of consciousness, then this would be it! In the same way, such experiences can’t be languaged very easily, so the need to reconcile and expunge them becomes nonverbal, i.e., “art”. What remains constant is a longing to understand what is really going on.
The side effect of such a process is not always artistic. Mental illness is one other option, as is religious fanaticism. The invention of visionary technology can also result — termed radionic or psychotronic here — and with it, an uncanny ability to make machines and instruments do work that otherwise would defy mechanistic/deterministic protocol. All such theory assumes that some motivated “life force” exists on, in or around the planet, inclined to guide consciousness and make possible similar benefits to all. I have heard it argued that an experience like mine is delusional and the product of exaggerated self-inflation, but when you actually experience the profundity of it all, that notion becomes ludicrous.
Here exists the profound difference between semiotic immersion in the expansive, visionary sense and semiotics in the scientific and engineering sense. Science, in keeping with mechanistic thought in general, views semiotics essentially as a means to and end, often as a means of reducing consciousness into discrete manageable compartments or quanta with mechanical or probabilistic relationships to other events. Of course, this is in part quite necessary for engineering purposes, in the same sense that our body must be understood as a biological mechanism as well as a conduit to cosmic contact. But in spite of what appears so obvious to some, others genuinely believe today that brain chemistry alone can produce consciousness and cognition.
JOHN NORSEEN
ART is more concentrated, thus more powerful SEMIOTICS...nature is replete with semiotics...semiotics is communications of every sort, but semiotics means that communications have structure...the more structure the more complicated and more expansive the communications. You need to build structure to communicate...semiotics is the structural components involved in making communication.
There is a big bang and there are universal forces at play and there becomes a resultant structure to the universe…certain things that physics allows and doesn't allow at certain times and grid locations. Semiotics however would allow for certain properties to form into place. Or, as you mention, can be pulled into place by future operations…a back vectoring semiotic channel. The rushing into place of the future controls a vivid understanding of past events. The future descends from its own compilation of the past. This is all described by the HUNT.
Imagine you are on the hunt to find where a person has been hiding, such as a Bin Laden. If you are wise to the environment, you can begin to tell if a location was frequented by someone or not. The Gary Larson cartoon...Yep, the deer sure was bedded down here last night! And on the ground are a wrinkled blanket and a picture of the deer's mom.
What is it that allows someone to know that an environment has been disturbed? Well, it is part physics, and then part semiotics… and then, if the place is really orchestrated, part ART. Then, if the location actually alters the future in a predictive way, it is science/technology...wherein Semiotics becomes ART and Science.
Now, what if you came across a place that, by its very nature, explained to you who had lived there, what they did, where they went and ways to access and communicate with them. What is left at the site is some object or mental impression. What really is the difference if the site leaves an interactive DVD/cell phone which allows you to technologically contact the prior inhabitants in some current distant location...or a mental semiotic that tells you what and where they are?
IF both hook you up and provide the answer, then it really is a matter of convenience which one you use to communicate with the here and there occupants of the location. The very place, the mental backdrop that it creates, and reliving the ritual of the place may all serve as semiotic steps necessary to create an open linkage to the inhabitants.
I am amazed how Blood is a very particular Black when in MOONLIGHT. Imagine a frenzied priest and a fully engaged sacrifice and the heightened intensity of the enchanted crowd of believers, swaying and reciting the chants...and then the act……. and then the flow of blood…the particular Black Flow in the moonlight and the sweaty perspiration of the tropic night...if there were a specific arrangement of icons, or Artworks, all would be a form of semiotics designed to capture and sustain the moments.
Today, just picking up a shard of a broken masonry coated with a bit of the tale could easily reawaken the entire complex culture, and it would surge through one’s mind psychically as an active memory of distant times.
Similar events could find you picking up a child's handmade toy outside of the death camps -- forcing in one's mind the playing of lilting violin music, the last chords of Sobibor.
Or, look at the splayed bodies arching towards a gasp of fresh air, holding hands and cradling a loved one in the dust casts at Vesuvius. Here, a single long day 2000 years ago is played over and over again. Every new glimpse or repeated look re-lives the killing grounds of the volcano.
ART is like the Blood in the Blackness, or the shard of a fallen child’s toy, or the cast of the last moment of life — it captures and propels the past with riveting clarity into the future, turned on by the Semiotic structure and Semiotic channels of some future Communications.
So Duncan, what is the "thing" that makes a Tuscany different than a landslide. What makes it 'obvious' that the break in the forest is the path of a wounded deer, and not some crashing boulder? It is the event and the interpretation of the event. Now some events have more semiotic energy than others. Pompeii and Vesuvius carry more semiotic weight than Krakatoa. The Nazi Death Camps carry more semiotic weight than the killing fields of Cambodia. And so too it seems that the Psychic Energy of the SA Pyramids is greater because of the entire ritual blood letting.
But it takes both sides of the Semiotic to have structure. The more structure, or the more unique the energy associated with the structure, the more it stands out in the future or the past. This makes sense...where sentient logic spends time and energy creating more structure, something highly unique takes place...there is a greater NOTICEABILITY…that someone, something, BEDDED down in this place.
Now let's say that I want someone to find me but I have to keep moving…I want to attract attention, but also to point the way to some future communications point. So I leave more elaborate or even simple signs and semiotics. Or I can leave a really powerful semiotic, a battery powered or solar powered or sonic powered device that when you pick it up it reveals where you need to look for me. Now what would this device be. Is it a semiotic…Yes. Is it radionic…Yes. Is it art…Yes. Is it scientific/technological...Yes.
Well, what if I was really powerful, and, rather than leave a device, I left Semiotic Energy impressed into the Space-Time manifold. Any being capable of semiotic thought, when passing into this zone, would immediately begin to KNOW ME, WHERE I WAS, WHAT I AM and WHERE I AM, and, would also begin to immediately draw my thoughts to this person and vice versa.
NOW this form of psychic Semiotics would utilize Synesthesia...the winds at the location could become comprehended as my Words speaking into the ear. Or the Coolness of the breeze could be transformed into a clear map of where I am located...and the feel of the sandy dirt falling through the fingers could be felt as thousands of candles burning with the promise of treasure, or power or love, as each one is endlessly extinguished.
It is probably true that the most highly advanced species in the universe will not rely on a device for communications, but will use the Semiotic Structures, the brains, of the local occupants for Connection and Directions. Therefore there must be Semiotics that take over the existing semiotic structure and cause it to transmit in a different way.
This is where the Radionics and the ART and the Science all become fused to allow the Semiotic structure of one to alter the semiotic structure of another, so the two can communicate fully.
So how can you capture and create this today? Just as you imagine, you must have some form of Interaction between the Art and the observer or the interpreter. The Art Form must be aware that it is being observed and then it must execute a semiotic that interacts with the interpreter.
Birds do this all the time. A bird flies into a tree branch in my backyard and sings out four or five notes and a harmony. IF I only approximate the same chirp, the bird will do it again trying to locate me. If I do a good job mimicking the bird chirp, I can actually feel the bird start to get excited in its semiotic quest. It sings a little bit louder or faster or twitches a bit more on the tree limb. But, at some point in this charade, the Bird figures out that I am not part of his species and his songs dissipate or he flies away and tries elsewhere.
What I feel you are looking for is for ART to find a Mate. And this quest can be accomplished by semiotic batteries. Such batteries correspond to a radionics feedback loop that can distinguish, via Interpretation values (aesthetic values), the level of interest in a Semiotic communications linkage. So how can this be done? Sensors and aesthetic gauges are needed to start with, plus some form of radionic measurement.
You have your ART placed in a specific location. Sensors near the ART can locate if an object is near the ART, and the ART maybe moves a bit to the left...what does the object do...or the ART lets out a pitch or two...what is the response of the object....The ART can turn on a semiotic battery and get brighter, move right and left and let out a song if the object begins to dance with it. The more the object responds the more the ART engages in semiotics. The logical conclusion of the ART is: sending out a message that if the object would like to occupy the ART, or for the ART to occupy the object, a STATEMENT or ACTION must be made: Trade address for credit card number....when satisfied, the ART is sold to the object. Or, some lesser form of language AGREEMENT is negotiated.
So I guess what I am getting to in Semiotics is that the final act is AGREEMENT or NEGOTIATION...some future event is entered upon.
And this is what separates Semiotics from other energies in the forest. SEMIOTICS can lead to a Future AGREEMENT. This future potential is what makes a semiotic stand out in the wilderness. THE SEMIOTIC in the most pure form is ART. Secondly it is Science/Technology. Thirdly, as Radionics, it is able to store and release the energy of Intent. All together, the total semiotic is a purposeful arrangement of structure that allows the Future to be Negotiated.
You and I know we are into semiotics, because my semiotics to you, as interpreted by you, forces you, by your nature, to re-interact with me, thus causing both of us to have some FUTURE PURPOSE. Semiotics is not only signs and symbols. When it becomes ART and Science/Technology, it is the Mechanism by which we can Interpret the Future and the Future that draws the past toward itself.”
------------------
I want to come back and spend more time expanding on your comments and questions here, and in several other of your recent email responses. The major Theme sticking in my brain today is the SELF IMAGE...what is it that is carried in each cell that projects some universal self...perhaps it is the DNA itself...that DNA projects a REPRESENTAMEN that each fractal piece can refer to for its local definition of boundary and self...and of a global carve out in space time of what will be occupied by SELF.
When I am on a chair on a roof and I am about to jump over the roof seven stories up onto another roof separated two feet away, I have a very good feeling or a very sick feeling that I can make the jump. It must be like this regarding intention...each part of the biological body must have a picture of whether it can reach the target…the grape on the end of the stick. There is some degree of measurement that is either encompassed by the semiotic whole or is not...if it is encompassed, then intentionality is very low. But if the gap is great then the Intentionality needed to close the gap must then become very large. Perhaps it is this SELF-KNOWLEDGE that is the cause of anxiety. I look at my dogs trying to get to the snack that I am holding just over the edge of a small gate...the dog would otherwise move right to the snack, but now there is an obstacle, the gate...the dog starts to get anxious and tries to go over, around, under the gate...you can see the pressure, the semiotic pressure building in the dog's mind to figure out how to get to the snack...and what is it...another semiotic is blocking what otherwise would be closure on the snack.
I see illness as an obstacle like the gate. The body knows what it is to feel healthy and gets anxious...gets internal pressure building up because energy is not matching the OVERALL PICTURE OF HEALTHY SELF. So the body does all kinds of incredible things to cover over the negative Semiotic, the gates, and to REBUILD a new perfect SELF IMAGE that will eventually reach over the gate and connect to the other set of correct self images.
So really, it is semiotics that is the root of INTENTIONALITY and all the anxiety and angst felt by an artist that they are not getting the Correct Image transmitted, or by the student getting all bent in knots about not understanding the correct image, such as in golf. You can see the perfect semiotic shot to the green and are happy when it occurs…or frustrated when it is blocked out; you make a mistake and try to correct for it. So then it is also Semiotics which is the root of Memory...all memory is either perfect semiotics recalled, or the intense anxiety of incorrect semiotics that needs to be torn down and rebuilt...But to what? A perfect SELF IMAGE.
Something must be providing the perfect self image...This is FORM, the form in information. FORM must be captured and reproduced by the biology...this must be occurring in the DNA...for what is it that a virus does when it encounters other cells. It INJECTS its DNA and creates a Copy of itself. This must reflect the basic structure of communications of life itself. Life is a REPRESENTATION of FORM....then life becomes a process of satisfying FORM. HENCE, the Pyramids. The purpose in life was to build the REFLECTING or RESONATING CHAMBERS, the RADIONICS to sustain life after life itself. The ANKH even looks like a MIRROR on shoulders. The BRAIN is the SEMIOTIC CHAMBER. For some the heart was the chamber...but we can see it is also the written or spoken language, the culture which is the resonating chamber. Hence, ART can become the media for representing the mirror to the FORM.
-----------------------
A couple emails back you talked about how you can feel different thought patterns, sometimes just a twinge, other times full bore…well, I wrote a rather lengthy project report for NASA back in 2000 and also for NSA related to Cryptomnesia…this is Greek for the Continuum of signals and noises that can occur in a brain.
Imagine a Vertical Bar to the left of this page. In the middle of the bar would be zero dB or decibel, and it would move to over 100 db + positive to the top...and in the same vein would register down into 150-200 db – negative.
This is exactly the same kind of measurement scale that is used to rate a submarine sound signal or Electromagnetic Signal...positive and negative. Well, it is possible using EEG and other BioFusion tools that one can track the movement of Identified Thoughts or Semiotic Structures as they emanate Functions or Communications (INTENT). In fact, right now, you Duncan, probably have hundreds or thousands of Thoughts and mini-thoughts that are dancing around, and banging around inside your head, just like a radar sweep looking out at weather patterns…one can radar sweep the semiotic conditions inside of your head and plot them on this Cryptomnesia Scale. You can even apply Doppler analysis and see which thoughts are growing in intensity, or dying out, or getting stuck in “feed-back” loops, sustaining themselves, perhaps in Unconscious or Non-Cognitive zones, at let's say – 100 db or -35-50 db, self obsessive routines, etc. etc.
FIGURE 30: BASYS, BIOLOGICAL ARCHITECTURES and SCIENTIFIC SYSTEMS
FIGURE 30: BASYS, BIOLOGICAL ARCHITECTURES & SCIENTIFIC SYSTEMS
When thoughts emerge past zero and move into the high positive values then you can clearly see that that is what is occupying the Mental Awake State of the person...you can flash brief visuals or sound types or kinesthetic potentials, and you can see the Brain Thought adjust…
Well, equally, if you are aware that a person is entering an Alpha State, or better yet, a hypnogogic (falling asleep) or a hypnopompic state (pre-waking state) of an modified Theta-Alpha brain engagement region...you can actually see the subconscious mind at work and interact with it...you can actually Inject Semiotics into the mental region and see the Brain Thoughts surround the Semiotic, infuse it, and then act upon it right into the Awake States. In this way, you can DIE INJECT, action potentials...for influencing someone during the day...or you can do the same thing and get Alert Semiotics injected into the sleeping and even into the LIFE-Death interface of the Delta state...you can probe the deepest depths of the person and see just exactly how deep into the abyss, the db, you can go...You can even affect someone with Semiotic cues down at negative (-) 200 db…down at the very bottom of our semiotic ability to understand information, and right at the zone where Alfven Wave corridors of the brain Magnetite exchange ZPE in the dendritic neuropil at nanoscale, discrete bandwidth, channels. It is right here in the Marianas Trench of human thought/perception, that the person is exposed to the Universals of Quantum State potentials, and that each individual thought or Semiotic Identity is formed, only to then bubble or shoot right up to the surface of positive thought realms.
Just as you can look into an aquarium or a fish bowl and see the stuff at the bottom work its way up to the surface, you can track the origin of Semiotics from Alfven Wave Interactions with ZPE, from the plumbed depths of the Brain.
FIGURE 31: HUMAN CENTERED PERCEPTION IN MACHINES
FIGURE 31: HUMAN CENTERED PERCEPTION IN MACHINES
This is really pretty cool stuff, because it allows us the opportunity to use Radionics to condition or reinforce or direct the destination of the most basic to the most sublime of human thoughts and the HUMAN CONDITION.
---
07 THE FAX OF REALITY
JOHN NORSEEN
I think I am catching you in between waves, so maybe someone on a jet ski can move along and keep us in sync with a message baton...what I want to jump on is the Representamen, the copy...every time we watch a TV show or a movie or listen to a CD or read the paper we are dealing with the very powerful Representamen...the copy. In fact, in any given day, the bulk or more than 90% of the semiotics that we encounter is the Representamen…and yet the INTENT or the ZPE of the original still conveys itself with tremendous power. Even now, you are getting my INTENT via a ton of InfoTech linkages and layers of systems of nothing but nothing other than REPRESENTAMEN — the radionic Witness! As I read your lament of the process and the emptiness of pure semiotic, just consider how massive is the world due to nothing other than a Fax of Reality. Pretty scary. It just goes to show how powerful STRUCTURE is for communications...once in place if we are not careful...most action is simply a response to COPY. It also goes to show that getting a semiotic in place is 8/10th the battle...for REPRESENTAMEN can last almost forever.
-------------------
Julie, my daughter, is at doctoral program at UPENN in the molecular biology lab. She is probing Chromatin in DNA as the source of its semiotic communications structure...it seems that for DNA to do what it does, to include dark DNA the Chromatin needs to be present and in the proper structure. That is why DNA twists, so the chromatin can be exposed to the ZPE at the right channel to get the information flow sequences to be completed and then copied and then assembled back again into the Copy or Representamen of the cell.
This sure sounds like the Norseen Semiotic...and even strongly shows that radionics could be operable at the cellular division level. So it can be stated that CELLS conduct communications, and the structure of cellular communication would appear to also have a semiotic structure.
So lets look at the human brain…the only times it is engaged in Semiotics is during the relatively narrow bandwidth of consciousness in the modified Theta state, the alpha state and portions of the Beta state brain frequencies…and in the REM state of Theta during the Dreaming semi-conscious realm of brain frequencies. So Humans have a relatively small set of channels in which our Brain Structure will resonate with ZPE powered information flow of semiotics.
It is easy to test this...use of drugs or change in body chemistry, high pH or temperature, or such and the first thing that snaps off is the Semiotic Channel...it simply stops and there is no memory.
I am fantastically intrigued by a vivid picture of supermodel Heidi Klum. She is kissing herself in a mirror...her eyes are closed, her mouth is open and her tongue and lips are touching in the mirror...and you, the observer, are looking down the camera lens at her/mirror image of her.
And Duncan, this is a very testable image of Semiotics...especially the power of the functional structure provided by the (I) Interpreter...In this case of Heidi Klum, there is this extra power surge in my sexual attraction centers of my brain where my INTERPRETATION of the picture of Heidi Klum is interposed within the Semiotic of HER INTERPRETER of herself, the mirror image, and the power of the Radionic transmitter, the camera lens capture and transmission of a Representamen of the INTERPRETER interface/conjunctions...and the picture just resonates with all kinds of extra energy. And I can feel my pulse rise and get a kick out of having my mind's eye become blended with Heidi kissing herself...
This power of the interpreter captured by Radionics is why the Madonna and Brittney Spears KISS resonated around the world with such power.
Now test the basis of the Semiotic structure....If I place a picture of Heidi Klum kissing herself in a mirror in front of my dog...he doesn't care…it means nothing to him...There is no semiotic resonance. It simply doesn't even cause a ripple in his Semiotic communications channels.
Even if I place a mirror in front of him, there is only a minimal spike in his semiotic response. But if I put a piece of his favorite food, pizza, in front a of mirror and wave it around to spread the aroma around his Nose-Brain-Semiotic structures, HE GOES WILD…just like I did for Heidi...He can relate to the Pizza, because in his mind, he can interpret that it will TASTE GOOD.
So if you are concerned we are dealing in Esoteric, erudite, non-approachable conditions of Semiotics and Radionics and ZPE and Alfven Wave Grids, then BE SOFTENED my good friend. The very fact that SEMIOTICS requires structure means that it can be TESTED, MEASURED, VERIFIED and understood and TECHNICALLY AMPLIFIED. I have given examples of how simply twisting Chromatin within a mitochondrial (ZPE channel) cell structure results in SEMIOTICS expression and cell division/cloning (Representamen)...and this can be shown faithfully and measurably.
We have also seen how different creatures express a different set of semiotic structures in their Brain System...such as dogs and people, the Heidi Klum example...and we can also see that Semiotics requires structure and then can only slice into and sample only a small portion, a limited channel of the ZPE spectrum. We can only communicate at a limited portion of Brain Activity at 5+ Hz, and then again at 8+ to 15+ Hz...different systems can activate themselves and others at vastly different ZPE frequency channels. This also can be tested and measured and MODIFIED.
So just as I was showing so strongly about how the Energy builds upon energy channel such as Gettysburg, or Niagara, or the aesthetic energy attractors and semiotic battery pulses of art and sculpture…we can measure Energy and Semiotics across different landforms, water currents and skyscapes and heavenly realms. If your radionics is not at the right Semiotic structure, ZPE resonate zone...it will not work.
Semiotics and ZPE and Radionics requires the correct superposition in the Alfven Wave GRID in order to work as an Information/Life communications receiver/transmitter.
DUNCAN LAURIE
Most art broadcasts a particular feeling or theme or narrative; even the most abstract forms of art convey impressions of intangible qualities...but are you suggesting that a semiotic beacon should depart from this template; that it should function as something that puts out a signal that reflexively conveys information back to that signal??.... about this passion for touching the matrix.....it seems kind of obvious now....but if a lot of ZPE gets stored at the studio by virtue of that xyz axis of changing atmospheric and terrestrial movement, changes we subjectively register as natural beauty; if that energy of beauty enters the symbolic Representamen of the site via its image, sound, object, etc....as those semiotics travel out into world, then does the ZPE go with it looking to boost the semiotic interface at the receiver end.....nicht war?
Come to think of it, when I go back and recollect what is called "primitive" art, even the present day Art Brut and Outsider Art, or art generally made by those without a formal art education, I often find associated with this art a highly charged studio locale, created by the artist in his eccentric style. Think of the Watts Towers, or of Reverend Finster or Walter Anderson or even the Coral Castle in Florida, especially the Castle which went even further in the supposition it was constructed with some paranormal force. All these examples, and many others like them on the periphery of culture, contain a completely against-the-grain determination to eclipse the everyday world with a magical one of the artist’s own design. The energy and symbols used in this process completely jive with paranormal energy loaded with powerful symbols. Likewise, all the objects and paintings that find their way out of these privileged environments carry with them the odd energy signature of their place of origin.
FIGURE 32: CHRIS HAILE CAMP, FLORIDA MOUNTAIN, MA
FIGURE 32: CHRIS HAILE CAMP, FLORIDA MOUNTAIN, MA
FIGURE 33: CHRIS HAILE RESIDENCE, 14TH STREET, NYC
FIGURE 33: CHRIS HAILE RESIDENCE, 14TH STREET, NEW YORK CITY, NY
I experienced this vividly through my friendship with an artist named Chris Haile. Haile is now with the Object, regretfully asphyxiating himself accidentally a few years ago. Chris was a painter and object maker who spent as much energy in creating the spaces in which he made the art as he did the art itself. He had created a number of these spaces around the country; a huge abandoned townhouse on 14th St. in Manhattan in which he squatted for ten years, several buildings on the Rio Grande in Langtry, Texas he purchased, and a camp up on a haunted section of Florida Mountain in western Massachusetts over the Housatonic railroad tunnel, which he also owned. He even created a representation of those spaces in a storage compartment he leased on Long Island and in the camper on his pick-up truck.
Several things the locales had in common was no plumbing and electricity, and the fact that most objects in the space were in some way crafted or painted by him. I mention this particularly in light of the way his paintings appeared when they were taken out of his environment; they seemed to die and become visually diluted in other locales, when before, in his own environment, they appeared like wild dreams or powerful talismans. Yet, when I take one of these paintings over to my studio and stage it properly, in such a way it is lit only by candlelight and surrounded by the energy there, the image regains its semiotic force and begins to offload the numinous presence that was so much a part of its original appearance and setting.
Meaning, the power was there in the image, even when it was in an ordinary environment, but it was vastly diluted. It took the construction of a similar, powerful environment to reanimate the associative forces of the original context, thereby exhuming the Intent of Chris…providing adequate ZPE for interpreting those forces by the viewer. This overlay is what I have been calling subtle energy, as it applies to art. I think you would call it a resonant semiotic force; when a symbol coupled with ZPE is magnified by virtue of appropriate environmental Representamen…all leading to the creation of the original “Object”, full of primordial “Identity”...?
Chris was very interested in my radionic studies and we discussed it often in the cryptic way that visual artists often discuss their craft. He knew what it meant to tune a space. Not only did he tune his spaces, but he was fond of going into abandoned lots in his neighborhood in New York and work for days removing rubbish etc., to then set about creating symmetry and poetic relationships among the remaining objects. I watched him do it in my own backyard in Long Island City, and he did it when staying in my cabin in Jamestown, when it was still primitive out there before the studio was built.
FIGURE 34: DUNCAN LAURIE – PENCIL AND INK ON PAPER. “PHI” PROPORTIONS DERIVED FROM STUDIO FLOOR PLAN AS APPLIED TO A DESIGN FOR
FIGURE 34: DUNCAN LAURIE
PENCIL AND INK ON PAPER.
“PHI” PROPORTIONS DERIVED
FROM STUDIO FLOOR PLAN
AS APPLIED TO A DESIGN FOR
A SLATE AND GLASS ARTWORK.
I take this idea of a tuned cavity very seriously; it has profound impact on the psyche. British writer John Michell has pointed out that sacred architecture was usually built on the ruins of earlier sacred sites that were places of particular importance on the landscape for eons before that. The use of sacred proportions in building design, coupled with similar proportions in the music played in those buildings, had the effect of tuning up the people who worshiped in those spaces. They were re-aligned by them in harmony from the dissonance of the work week; over time, this process stabilized society and sustained culture. In a small way, artists like Chris are carrier waves from a gentler past who have migrated through this mechanistic and utilitarian culture like shadows, producing their Representamen and then gracefully bowing out.
JOHN NORSEEN
You state: “Meaning, the power was there in the image, even when it was in an ordinary environment, but it was vastly diluted. It took the construction of a similar, powerful environment to reanimate the forces latent in the original context, thereby exhuming the Intent of Chris.... and providing a means for interpreting those forces to the viewer. This overlay is what I have been calling subtle energy, as applied to art. I think you would call it a form of resonant semiotic force; symbol coupled with ZPE that is magnified by virtue of environmental Representamen…all leading to the creation of Identity…?”
I repeat here above your triumphal paragraph, meaning the power (ZPE) was in the image (visual semiotic sign/symbol), but vastly diluted by an ordinary environment (the structure for resonance was weak, the Interpretant was weak, hence the ZPE of the Object and any of its Representamen, were also weakened, as if a semiotic battery losing its stored power charge. It took a new STRUCTURE…as in a new Brain Interferometer, to reanimate...to link R with I with O to harness ZPE within an Alfven Grid, to provide a Resonating Chamber (a studio on the wisp of land) - to tune in the right Original Context, the resonating identity of Chris...and when all of these pieces of the Semiotic where in place: Voila, the INTENT OF CHRIS WAS EXHUMED — he was a life-death wraith no longer! And further, by Reanimating the Semiotic and getting the ZPE to flow loud and clear made it possible for the many varied viewers, each with their own Interpretive function to latch onto the Semiotic - hence original intent of Chris. Yes, by reconstructing the structures necessary to resonate the true intent and identity of Chris... “you can say that it was a form of resonant semiotic force, symbol coupled with ZPE that is magnified by virtue of environmental Representamen, all leading to the creation of identity…” and to a greater number of Copies or Representamen to spread the semiotic of Chris into more and more, nth quantum dimensional states by carriers of the semiotic, riding along the energy waves, ZPE to all interlocking Alfven wave GRID LOCKS.
Duncan, once you enter a full fledged semiotic, replete with all the components and full of ZPE and highly defined Alfven localities, you can hopscotch and jitter bug all across the domain of the semiotic...Identity becomes your frequent flyer and free admissions pass...once you identify with a strong Semiotic, it can propel you across the universe and into the quantum worlds of conceptual context and interpretation. Much like a mother ship monitors the adventures and misadventures of a cluster of PROBES...once you enter a semiotic, you can journey and encounter all the intersections and nooks and crannies of the Alfven Grid and still come back to the homepage, carrying the knowledge gained from the frontier. This is what happens when we dream, or enter mod-Alpha, and what happens at death-life interface.
But again, as in life...Semiotics are drawn to the biggest energy bursts...just like Ramana was beckoned to the dirt floor of the temple, and just like the ortgeist and zeitgeist I described of Gettysburg or of Kharkov Angelskoye, Semiotics will populate high energy regions, because that is where the fun is...blinded by the light...deceived by the light...the light of a puff of smoke on the grassy knoll, the center of mass shots and the sabot exploding round head shot covered and disguised by the deception...the puff of light before the atomic event…the direction of matter to antimatter and back again.
And yes, as you implicate…ZPE when channeled by the howitzer muzzle of spiraled semiotics can be flung forward to explode upon unsupported structures - intellectual combat and intense PSYOP...ZPE can be used to override and burn out the mental circuits of brain structures not necessarily beefed up nor reinforced. Semiotics and ZPE can be used as a mind catapult, deranging and slinging sanity into the shredder box of derision. Semiotics and ZPE can become the controlled smart weapons of conceptual warfare – hence the basis of my presentation to the Knowledge Warfare groups in our National Security apparatus.
This tag match we are in amazes me...I feel compelled to write you an answer, and after I send it, then I get an email from you asking the questions that I just answered, forcing me to recalibrate to see if the first edition was OK, and then this prompts me to extend it even further...wow, I am learning as much from this as I am trying to impart to you...basically, this is fun and it is exercising my mind in ways that I have not encountered before...so thanks for the keen workout sessions.
P.S. I still need to confer with you on this powerful thought train. Let's say you or anyone is walking down the streets in New York City and on one side of the street there are two guys engaged in a putting demonstration...the golf putter, the golf balls and the little flags marking the hole on the artificial putting green. And on the other side of the street, there are two guys tearing into each other in a streetwise brawl.
Now how many people watching the putting tournament will stay glued to the drama and keep to their side of the street...and how many people will migrate over to the other side of the street to watch the fisticuffs flow down the street. Quite likely, the lure of the pure energy involved/associated with the fight will overcome even the most passionate golfer/semiotician.
Point being, energy, or a new ZPE channel, will like a light bulb to a moth, draw the attention of all structures in the vicinity of the energy bulge.
And for my Dog's sex life, critical for the survival of the species, there is absolutely no INTERPRETER structure to introduce and maintain Heidi Klum as a semiotic...not a radionic system in the world can get my dog to produce a Semiotic Interpreter of Heidi Klum...unless and until, somewhere in his brain there develop neurons which can convert Heidi Klum as part of an Interpretation for survival.
Now it comes to Interpretations as a critical part of semiotic structure to close the circuit and allow for ZPE and Alfven Wave grid to become effective as a form of Information Flow, Life, Communications...for instance, no matter how passionate and how vociferously a foreign language tries to fully engage me with clear understanding of their semiotics...unless I can truly interpret the language, then I am always operating at less than optimal, maximal, and probably only minimal semiotic capability with respect to the full power spectrum (ZPE) of that foreign language. Not until I can build in the Interpretive function of the foreign language can I unlock the ZPE of the other language.
But Duncan, ART operates somewhere underneath a foreign language. Even though I may not understand ancient Sumerian or Aztec…I can interact and even be inspired by their ART. Therefore ART occupies a natural level of Semiotic understanding and underlying structure in the Human Brain. Again, I can show different forms of ART to my dog and there is no Interpretation…but I can show ART to many peoples and can get some degree of response from them as to the aesthetics involved...from little to nil to a great variety of responses...so this in itself is showing that ART itself is still probably an evolving structure in our Brains, somewhere older than the concept of language. So what this tells me is that when we begin to see the origins of art on cave walls and cave paintings at a time when proto-language is also still in its infancy, that somehow the structures in the brain that correspond to ZPE and Alfven Wave Grids, that responds to the ultra and infra sounds of Nature and cause certain feelings of dread, fear and god-like euphoria are structures very close to the INTERPRETIVE structures in Semiotics…and are precursors of communications and information flow of life leading to greater and greater degrees of complexity and greater access to more and more channels of ZPE, of which Radionics may help speed up the access of humans to greater LIFE COMMUNICATIONS channels.
Now I hope you can see why NSA, entrusted with Communications Security for our National Security affairs, is so interested in Semiotics...a better understanding of Semiotics and Radionics allows for NSA to assume the role of greater and greater degrees of INTERPRETATION...to become the Rosetta stone for expanded milieu of Understanding Additional Life Forms.
DUNCAN LAURIE
Now that you have begun to outline a model for the Norseen Semiotic, I keep asking myself, “How can this material become tangible in day to day terms; how can it be used or seen or grasped as a functional reality, as a survival skill or as an awareness that can improve some aspect of life.” Naturally, I see the problem mostly in art terms, but there are simpler, more direct applications to be considered.
Take cooking. We all know that a good cook puts more into the food than the ingredients. Appling intention into the Representamen (the food) definitely conveys love or taste satisfaction to the interpretant, along with the nutrients. One would think that this transaction could be measured in some way, seeing as it is so obvious aesthetically. Making that process measurable would make the Norseen Semiotic digestible to a whole lot more people.
FIGURE 35: DAMADIAN MRI PATENT
FIGURE 35: DAMADIAN MRI PATENT
I am also thinking about Dr. Raymond Damadian 15 again, the disgruntled non-recipient of the Nobel Prize in Medicine who revolutionized medical imaging technology. I've been collecting his full page ads from the N.Y. Times, with the picture of the Medal printed upside down. You pointed out some weeks back that it was his discovery in 1971 that cancer tissue emitted stronger signals than the surrounding healthy tissue that led to the discovery and use of MRI scanning technology. You conjectured that his exclusion from the prize was a political attempt to bypass what his discovery may have held for understanding energy medicine and technology. Meaning, if one could identify disease by frequency and wavelength then one could treat it in the same manner, by canceling those frequencies.
It made sense, and you can clearly see a similarity to the radionic approach. What came into my thoughts today was the relationship to that paper I sent you last year about the re-examination of the de la Warr radionic photographs taken in the 1950's. Today’s scientists had applied sophisticated computerized analytic techniques to the original glass plates and discovered in the process that those images were actually holographic, structurally similar to a MRI! Meaning, the mind of the radionic photographer alone created a linkage between diseased organs in a patient and a photographic emulsion of same.
The thought for now is, if the image produced is actually a hologram and not just a photograph, then what is it actually composed of? My limited understanding of the hologram is that it is an interference pattern produced by coherent light interacting with some coded information. So what is a semiotic composed of? Is it a magnetic hologram animated by ZPE instead of light? Could a radionic photograph utilize the types of forces we have been discussing? Of course most would say it is not possible, but if you broaden the perspective to include all types of mysterious photographs, or pictures of mysterious things that should not exist rationally, then there is an extensive database supporting the existence of such phenomena. If such photography exists, then it can be scientifically studied. I'm a sculptor, and I like to see ideas get made.
The diseased tissue that a competent radionics practitioner detects with his device has an energetic signature, but nobody believes that it can be detected by his mind alone, using the box. Then, in 1971, a Dr. Damadian comes along and in a manner not un-similar to radionics devises a way to interpret energetic differences in tissue using accepted theory and technology. He detects an electro-magnetic signature of the diseased tissue, rather than a dowsed rate or semiotic of the disease. Of course, the discovery instantly goes sideways into becoming an imaging invention alone, and the notion of refining these images to reveal more about the actual pathologies gets sidelined, at least until now.
JOHN NORSEEN
Quoting Duncan: "The thought for now is, if the image produced is actually a hologram and not just a photograph, then what is it actually composed of?"
FIGURE 36: DE LA WARR RADIONIC PHOTOGRAPH OF PELVIS
FIGURE 36: DE LA WARR RADIONIC PHOTOGRAPH OF PELVIS 16
FIGURE 37: HOLOGRAPHIC RE-INTERPRETATION OF DE LA WARR RADIONIC PHOTOGRAPH
FIGURE 37: HOLOGRAPHIC RE-INTERPRETATION OF DE LA WARR RADIONIC PHOTOGRAPH
The Semiotic Structure: remember, when a semiotic interacts with another semiotic, or portions thereof…such as just the Interpreter…ZPE channels open up. The hologram…or the mathematical function of the semiotic within an operating space...much like the display on this screen as the result of information, signal processing, and the software mathematical function within the operating system Windows, etc. presents the information such that you, yet again another semiotic structure, can access it.
Quoting Duncan: "How can this material become tangible in day to day terms; how can it be used or seen or grasped as a functional reality, as a survival skill or as an awareness that can improve some aspect of life."
OK, this is a very rough answer, but here is a simple and perhaps eloquent response. You are on a diet and on medication and you are interested in the amount of vitamins and fat content and sodium in a can of Semiotic Soup...so you turn it over and read the ingredients label and get an idea of how healthy the soup is for you…combining quantitative and qualitative assessments to determine a measure in your mind of how healthy some Soup is.
FIGURE 38: THOUGHT PHOTOGRAPHS OF PEN KNIFE TAKEN WITH MARK 1 CAMERA
FIGURE 38: THOUGHT PHOTOGRAPHS OF
PEN KNIFE TAKEN WITH MARK 1 CAMERA 17
At the very least by now, we can look at any piece of ART, qualitative as it may be, and very quickly determine the ratio of Object, O, to Interpretant, I, to Representamen, R, and active ZPE or battery powered, and evidence of Alfven Wave or magnetic properties…tied into Time values and locations, zeitgeist and ortgeist, and singular Semiotics or complex, adaptive semiotics, and currently understood semiotics...you can decipher it...or steganographic, or hidden semiotics...you just don't have the Rosetta stone to decode it. So you can then enter the ART into a Semiotic measurements database and it will occupy some niche due to the properties above that you have designated to the ART…for example…it scores a 90% on the object…it is a very accurate drawing or painting in color of a Bird.
It is quite obviously a BIRD and not just a general bird, but a Baltimore oriole, and the date of the painting and the location of the painting indicate Baltimore, 1890, an oriole. There is not much interpretation required so that scale is low, maybe 10 points...it also has high value on a one dimensional or two dimensional scale of the Representamen...maybe 30 points, but it doesn't show the bird in flight, or eating or giving birth...this would be better in the ART form of a movie of the Oriole in a life portrayal sequence. So if I said I have ART that is 90% O, 10% I and 30% R, you get a pretty good feel that I am listing a book of Birds that one can scan through for general recognition and pleasure — perhaps acquaintance with the Oriole as a learning guide.
But let's say that I give you a Semiotic score card of O 5%, I 90%, and R 70%, with active ZPE and Alfven…but only in battery mode. Now this would more than likely be something of an Andy Warhol, or something that moves about and makes noise when touched, changes lighting parameters, from full light to shadows, which reveals different tones and aspects of the painting...it is what the viewer the I sees in it, but with some guidance from the artist via the radionics
Or maybe something is a strong Representation of a meadow and very like a Monet, with a Semiotic score slightly different from a Van Gogh — but then the truly great ART works have a very strong double or triple bond of O to I to R such that it itself becomes its own icon...its own O...this could be listed as Very Special ART where O becomes O due to strong I over R...or due to strong R over I.
There is also the opportunity to take a famous painting and in the different sectors of the painting we place the database cursor over the table of food in a Renoir or the veins in the hands in a Rembrandt...and we type in O+ or I++ and thus ACCLAIM the painting and describe it in its geometry of Semiotic Form…the full left 50% of the painting is pure O, the full right 50% of the painting is pure Interpretation…this could be how best to describe a Picasso.
So Duncan, there may be various ways to Semiotically Measure ART, but the point is, it can be done...and it can establish a new form of Artistic Measurement…or could help in the understanding and assessment of how the ARTIST went about the creation of the ART piece…it also allows for ART to be introduced into Machine Language for Machine Translation and Machine Understanding of the ART process. In such a way, Semiotics and Semiotics Databases could be a very acceptable way of sorting and storing and assigning Addresses or Markers to ART.
Quoting Duncan: "You conjectured that Dr. Damadian's exclusion from the prize was an attempt to take the focus off the implication of his discovery may have held for energy medicine and technology." Meaning, if it could identify disease by frequency and wavelength, then it could treat it in the same manner."
You betcha I did — the full application of the electromagnetic spectrum to bolster medicine should already be common place by now. But the highly specialized, nick and niche approach to Western medicine, as opposed to whole spectrum vitality, is delaying the onset of very healthy understanding of what frequencies and resonances a healthy body should be in.
I recently did an analysis of how we fall asleep and then sleep for 8-9 hours per night...I came up with about 30 interrelated processes and functions and circuits that all have to be in some frequency or resonance with each other in order to have a Healthy Night's Sleep. Now, if I went into a Sleep Disorder Clinic I am sure the baseline study of my problem would never include this depth of wholistic interdependence. I would probably be measured on a few factors, depending on the insurance allowances, the specialty of the practitioner, the limited scope or lack of combinations of the testing equipments...instead of one machine to test over a range of activities, I would probably be tested on one parameter at a time...and then some simple form of recommendation and doctor's analysis would prescribe some wide ranging medication to take for some general time period…to come back in two weeks and hopefully the Body Will Have Restored Itself...or if not, then more piece by piece testing that chases the tail of the problem.
And what is the problem? As we keep finding out, the Body, the Mind, the Spirit all have a FORM within InFORMation, that expresses the vitality of the Object...even down into the DNA. It is this Semiotic Form that allows the genes to know what it is they are copying, or for the broken bone to know what it is to look like and when to stop repairing, or even for a cellular function to REPLACE the loss of the cell type next door. And every one of these Health Maintenance and Repair Functions operates on a specific Frequency and Resonance. It is shown that if a broken arm is put in a field of active Alfven Waves, and ZPE and energy and positive semiotic form is impressed into the area of bone recovery, the Bone heals faster and with a closer match to the original. This SEMIOTIC repair is going on Constantly...every repair function in the body opens up a ZPE channel, and the ZPE flows in according to the Semiotic FORM, the amount of O to I to R that needs repair.
Even when we go to sleep, we need to enter into specified Slow Wave Sleep, Deep Delta Frequencies for the Brain to switch into parallel memory consolidation and gene/protein expression. If you pulse the brain with different frequencies, you disrupt memory flow patterns.
So Yes, you betcha...if the medical industry allowed full body scans and full body semiotic matching frequency and resonance Bathing, and Radionic Form Enhancements...then the entire Medical Infrastructure of independent specialists and Disorders Pharmacology practices would all be in serious jeopardy.
Quoting Duncan: “Concerning Dr. Edward Mitchell, and his re-examination of the de la Warr radionic photographs taken in the 1950's: the group had applied some sophisticated computerized analytic techniques to the glass plates, and discovered that the images were actually holographic, and structurally similar to a MRI! Meaning the mind of the radionic photographer was capable; it seemed, of creating a linkage between a diseased organ in a patient, the mind of the photographer focused through the radionic camera, and a photographic emulsion.”
Yes, Yes...The active spectra and resonance of the object, its FORM, can be represented in information, such as the hologram…such that selection of any self-reinforcing ergodic of the hologram can be used to reflexively recreate not only the hologram but the active spectra and resonance of the original FORM. The Object can be copied very exactly, in fact, reproduced, such that O and R are nearly identical...so if you see an R as 99% of O then you are dealing with holographic representation of Object, in itself, the Medical Healing ART...also in this case, you can use a full representational Representamen, R, as a medical guide for a diseased or dismembered Object. Let's say you took a cancer-ridden liver and began to resonate it against a normal healthy Representamen of a Liver, and you could make the resonance of the R stronger than the frequency and resonance of the diseased liver, O...eventually, if there is enough healthy liver remaining in the diseased liver, O, then those parts will resonate and heal based on the Representamen model. There are more and more studies which show that placing a diseased organ into an otherwise healthy environment, the normal "necessary" intermingling of resonances and frequencies will overpower and subdue the disease frequencies and set up healing frequencies in the sick organs.
On a larger test model, sick people were asked at what age they felt the best…then they are put into a room that contains that year's stuff…like 1968...and after one week to ten days, the baseline measurements of the previously sick people are all statistically significantly improved simply by psychologically reminding and placing them in a Representamen of healthier times.
If you could Radionically treat, and ZPE plus, and Alfven Wave surge and de la Warr surround a person in healthy Semiotic Holograms, the only response the body could take is to Entrain itself in the Healthy Patterns. This is also the medical efficacy of Meditation, and other holistic treatments. They work! because the Body, Mind, Spirit, are all Semiotic Structures anyway. SEMIOTICS IS HOW WE COMMUNICATE — AT THE INTELLECTUAL LEVEL AND AT THE BASELINE HOMEOSTATIC LEVELS AS WELL... WHAT IS CANCER OR DISEASE ANYWAY? IT IS DISRUPTED SEMIOTICS. RESTORE THE SEMIOTICS, RESTORE THE COMMUNICATION, RESTORE THE PATTERNS, AND THE CANCER OR DISEASE IS EXPUNGED. THIS IS HOW THE BODY DOES “HEAL THYSELF”!
----------------
Hey – you are on to something! Last night I caught something on the bottom of the CNN news, literally at the bottom of the screen as they scroll other news...what I picked up is that a group of cancer specialists have isolated the Frequency and the make up of the suicide message that cancer cells transmit to healthy cells to upset their programming and cause them to also become cancer cells...the group is now investigating the role of 'Radio-Therapy' to jam the suicide signal and to program and send healthy Radio messages to the afflicted area…
NOW this is something to watch...and it is being kept low, low key — I wonder why everyday you get wild medical claims about “potential” cures, the heart attack gene, the weight loss switch, the AIDS pill…and here is this simple and apparently powerful approach to cancer and it shows up in the small print at the bottom of the news screen late at night…
Go figure...
To give you an idea how messed up the medical hypothesis is — I truly think they are purposefully obfuscating Radio Frequency with Radio Therapy as the use of radiation for cancer treatment...they can't even use the proper RF terms...or maybe that is how they are burying the real RF work...I can't find the article but will keep trying. As for medical care over the centuries...what exactly is a doctor...someone that, 1) Cuts you with a knife; 2) Poisons you; 3) Burns you; or 4) Fools you into thinking you will be OK...and all the time it is the HUMAN Body semiotic that is putting itself back together again, even with the delaying tactics of medicine. It is about time we faced up to the true semiotics of health care…allow and foster the body to maintain a complete O, with positive I, and a genetic and immune system that can produce exact R, with each OIR semiotic at a specific frequency and resonance structure in the electromagnetic spectrum.
DUNCAN LAURIE
I started today with a computer lesson. I think, “The computer computes as long as it has adequate memory. Too little memory, the computer crashes. So what is memory?”
Answer: Something I don’t understand. What I do understand, more memory isn’t the only answer; being selective about the input is the real issue.
I’ve been working more and more with the computer lately. Is it not depressing how much of our lives are dictated by representations? There are so many; computers, movies, television, radio, iPods, video games, etc., etc. Not so much singing, dancing, nature walks, outdoor physical exertion anymore. I’ve begun to notice, and experience myself, that people who become absorbed into all these representations seem to lose part of their ability to function in the real world, or maybe they lose interest in functioning in that world. It’s like the images are filling up their memory too fast. By contrast, friends that are primarily oriented towards physical tasks remain highly functional and remain suspicious of replications of reality and their surrogate technologies.
So I ask you, are we becoming like computers whose memory is being used up by the entire spurious semiotics, ready to crash at any moment?
My family and I are driving across the Newport Bridge to dinner. We are near the top. State police are walking toward us on the catwalk. Their cars are parked here and there, lights flashing. In the distance a Coast Guard boat speeds toward the bridge. Last night there was another, luckier, jumper: a girl with one foot already up on the rail who was grabbed by a passing motorist, who held on.
Later that night at home, we sat watching a film called Lost In Translation, starring an aging Bill Murray who falls in love with a much younger Scarlet Johansson, while both are on assignment in Tokyo. They are both married, but lonely. In fact, the whole movie exudes an existential loneliness. The backdrop was the incredibly bizarre fusion of Japanese pop culture and inscrutable Asian semiotics. The people and the culture were used in such a way as to reinforce a state of emotional contactlessness. Naturally, the friendship between Murray and Scarlet evolve in contrast to that void, but remain unresolved romantically, which added further to the sense of human alienation in their techno environment.
What struck me again was the overlay of Representations, with human identity buried somewhere far under the pile. It contrasts with the picture of man alone in a rain forest, buried under all the semiotics of nature. In both cases the defining human characteristics of love and compassion have difficulty locating their own Representamen to render these worlds enjoyable and meaningful.
But when man was forced to survive among overwhelming natural forces, the experience led to enormous self-reliance and confidence and ultimately to visionary and sacred experience. By contrast, being overwhelmed by man’s semiotic universe appears to lead to alienation, exhaustion and psychic fragmentation. The more we commit ourselves to these glowing screens and their symbol systems, the more it seems our energy becomes absorbed into them. Is our media technology actually a type of semiotic vampirism, sucking our human identity from our cells?
Do you remember describing what a weapon was to me? “A weapon is anything that thwarts or constrains intent, preventing some desired goal from occurring.” The NS contains enough information to adequately describe a theoretical weapon that can be used to influence behavior or even control perception. By inference, it could also be used to absorb or thwart life force, and with it motivation and intelligence. In my best scenario, the NS is used to free us from these possibilities, not the reverse.
This sounds nuts, but do you ever think we are being impacted by some predatory force? Are we doing it to ourselves or is it something from somewhere else? Our elected leaders seem as a rule very disconnected from normal people, driven instead by the perceptions of themselves in the media, by abstract ideological concerns and by immediate constituent and lobbying pressures. The Interpretant of our culture seems almost perfectly split in two, a Jekyll/Hyde personality; one half ready to send the other half off to kill or die for less than profound reasons….
Information injection must be seen as a
WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION
JOHN NORSEEN
Yes, memory can be used up. You can fill it in with quality O-I relationships, like your comments about early man in the midst of the 3, 4, 5 right triangle jungle canopy of survival — not much time for R back then...maybe in the damp cool quiet of the dark cave, a few symbolic beasts on the wall, but for most, it was as you state…physical man dealing with O, and I spawned O's that may or may not exist, but which must be prepared for and dealt with.
So in my studies, there is not only a channel capacity in the human brain: we can only deal with so much at one time, even with multi-tasking personalities, split identities and all the rest. The brain can only take in so much sensory data. The Central Nervous System has evolved to the point where all Afferent Nerves that lead to the brain are in themselves biological filters on a 1/f state. In other words, the afferent pathways to the brain through the limbs, the hands in particular, convert the signal from the tips of our fingers to, just before entering the brain, 1/f signals which allow for more rapid processing by the brain.
Brain processing itself is easily swamped. There are some calculations that can be performed that account for resetting and recycling times, dampening out conditions and such. It comes up with a total memory capacity of full bodies NS, at a low of 1.7 million O, to some order of magnitude one to several times greater based on initial conditions. At its lowest capacity each brain can deal with only a couple million complete Thought Constructs tops.
We Are Protein “Scrunch Up” Creatures
We twist, we turn,
We writhe in pain, we jump for joy;
we even roll over in the grave.
We deal with signals embedded in noise.
Noise cues us and switches us.
Life: rearrange invariant signals - no straight lines.
100% Signal is our Dreams. Key to:
Pure virtual reality
Technologies to: Deceive us
Inject us with inverse transforms
It is only in the communications switching capacity of the brain — (no two neurons normally physically touch each other, therefore, this gap represents a switching capacity), and it is this switching capacity of several million objects that allows for our great mental scan and scope capabilities, not the Memory Storage in physical memory of proteins.
This structure is almost limitless in the ability to generate Holonomic - holographic like resonance patterns. In physical protein memory, there are parts of the brain that deal in one memory to one laid down protein. For instance, in the Fusiform Gyrus, the one to one memories of loved one's faces are stored in isomorphic recall conditions, whereas the rest of the brain is involved with undulating and regular modifications of the alternating calpain, induced plasticity of neurons and protein lay down, that occurs each time we introduce a new memory for codification. These functions normally take place during the delta frequency of deep sleep patterns, only after repeated Rapid Eye Movement (REM) cycles trigger new memory consolidation.
So again, if you disrupt sleep patterns…some very important memory conditions can be delayed or destroyed. Point being, the brain is basically limitless in rearranging and communications switching of NS, but the underlying amount of memory itself, one for one memories of O, R and the role of the I can be easily swamped...which is what you are getting at. If you spend all your Brain Processing Representamen, then your brain will be very, very fragile and it will change the person you are...making you worlds different from a person that is constantly engaged in only O – I relationships in nature.
In a way, O, R, and I are like Protein, Fat and Carbs...you are what you eat...you are what you THINK. Yes, you may actually be describing a process by which we are evolving like fattened livestock into R memory filled automatons, ready to be programmed to jump in our teenage years off the most local bridge span.
Yes, the NS can be used as a weapon, a psychological weapon of the first strategic and then regional and finally local tactical option. You need only use EM wavelengths to enhance pre-existing biochemical states in the brain to achieve disassociate effects at a minimum.
By pulsing someone at appropriate 7-9 Hz beat frequencies, the Pineal gland proteins are caused to clamp up and squeeze out melatonin. Along with similar frequencies for Adenosine, these actions will cause our reticular sleep formation to fire and we will most likely fall asleep, or drift into some interim brain/phase state.
So, why shouldn't other frequency oscillations enable the delivery of other bio-chemicals into the blood brain barrier? Bypassing the normal Zot and Zanulin protein protection, such as with nano-particles, etc. may cause any of many selected brain circuit-behavior modes to be induced, such as the modification of Larium at the Superior Colliculus, which can trigger suicide ideation?
Previously I described at length the Mathematical Enterprise that our brain can experience as re-call 'able' dreams, visions, or realities! There may be whole environments that we are experiencing or are about to experience that will fantastically reshape and alter our current mind-view of reality.
There is evidence in the geologic record of periodic Magnetic Field reversals about every 400,000 years in some weird cosmic spiral in the Milenkovitch Mechanism, and during these magnetic shifts 3/5's to 4/5's of the species get fried. Well, why shouldn’t brand new Alfven Waves and phase shifted entanglements with ZPE and the Zeeman effects of continuous wave energy in the Schuman Waveguide cause ripples of new thought forms to emanate into the consciousness of living Objects O?
Yes, Duncan, we may be polluting our very survival mechanisms with Junk R. We may actually be in the dawn or the mist of a new phase of NS oscillation resonance patterns, and we may very well be subject to ongoing Weapons Testing programs of the NS.
Your probing missives have allowed me to delve into the brain-mind as NS resonator. Accordingly, a brain wants to tell a story, to make a story, and to finish a story because that is how it is built. That is exactly what the NS is looking for…something to resonate with and fill in the gaps.
DUNCAN LAURIE
We have been discussing linkage between two or more semiotic systems, and have arrived at the examination of Interpretation. As you point out, we can have the most sophisticated communication system in the world, but without being able to interpret it, we cannot participate in its information. This brings me back again to Art.
The dictum of avant garde art for some time has been: Art as encryption for its own sake. Meaning will only be revealed in a future context that has evolved to that level of interpretation. In this way contemporary art has provided a means of self-justification for virtually any form of expression. In your terms, one might venture a criticism that creating a semiotic with a thwarted interpretant leads to a significant shortfall of ZPE being brought into the equation. In art terms this equation nets out as a very cerebral form of art; something interpreted only conceptually in the mind of the beholder. Nothing comes crashing through into the outer world where the Interpreter really lives, the one that has to dodge bullets, cars and insults.
But it does bring up another interesting point. If you go back to the very earliest art ever made or found (at least that I am aware of), you have to go to Northwestern Australia, to the Jinmium site. There you will find carved rocks that were already 20 or 30 thousand years old when the caves in Europe were being painted. These carvings were not effigies of animals, shaman, food gathering and procreation. The rocks in question, often the size of Volkswagens, are covered with a dot matrix of cup holes about the size of a fist. Covering a 60 acre site, they extend so far into the soil that researchers were able to date them from debris littered around where the holes begin, with tools found far below that. The archeologists present at the site estimated that the resources and time applied to these monuments represented a staggering societal commitment on the part of the original artists.
FIGURE 39: JINMIUM, AUSTRALIA. “WORLD’S OLDEST ART?”
FIGURE 39: JINMIUM, AUSTRALIA. “WORLD’S OLDEST ART?” 18
So here at the dawn of man we see a commitment to pure abstraction, a semiotic created without a readymade interpretation, like much art today! One could imagine that the function of such objects, like the standing stones of pre-history, were in fact a type of beacon. Beacon for what? Perhaps when human effort is applied to rock in some fashion it begins to resonate like the subs did in attracting the souls. Incidentally, the dot matrix theme is also a favorite of several of the more artistically-inclined radionics inventors; the ones' who didn't use electricity. It is also quite modern in the electronic design sense.
To fulfill the necessity of Interpretation, these rocks would have to be invested with some semiotic content, and this semiotic content would then have to be able to be discharged somewhere else, possibly as imagery. I saw something like this happen once. It was in a film made by a friend about Credo Mutwa, a South African artist/shaman. He brought a group of his apprentices and a group of sick people up to a standing stone site way in the northern part of that country. Elaborate rituals were performed among the rocks, and, when completed, the sick stepped foreword and placed their hands upon the stone, drawing the healing energy from it and into them.
In this way perhaps, the notion of healing and the notion of art became fused in the early brain in a pre-lingual fashion, as you describe. Tie this in with the semiotic power of the ancestors to burst in on the resonant power of the Earth frequency wave-guides, as Solstice and Equinox light rays penetrate their stone chambers, and you now have religion. What exactly occurs in the mind of the Interpretant, the benefactor of the experience?
Today we have isolated these experiences into respective disciplines, intellectualized them, and in the process obscured that part of the brain that took everything in whole-hog. Perhaps one could conjecture that with the evolution of the cerebral cortex, the surface Representamen at the periphery of the brain you spoke of replaced a deeper object oriented part of the brain where the cosmic semiotics took hold.
I’d like to see art that cancels out the layer upon layer of Representamen that make up my conscious and unconscious mind. I want it to shut off those programs so that I can go back and experience the wildness and irrationality and power of the unencumbered spirit/soul “Object”. This power is still felt in ancient stone art. There are artists today who are trying very hard to simulate those effects by making their own kind of megaliths; James Turrell and Charles Ross come to mind.
FIGURE 40: CHARLES ROSS, THE SOLAR PYRAMID, NEW MEXICO. ONE HOUR TIME LAPSE OF STARS
FIGURE 40: CHARLES ROSS, THE SOLAR PYRAMID, NEW MEXICO. ONE HOUR TIME LAPSE OF STARS.
JOHN NORSEEN
In your email you correctly advance the more ancient semiotic artifacts of the Aborigines...I did not mean to scrimp on them in my earlier comments concerning the cave paintings. I agree with you that the Direct power of the Object – Interpreter can be captured and powered and that is probably what is going on with the aborigine elaborations...they represent the universal harmonics that touch the very old, old soul in each of us...as you indicate, the part of us that current culture tries to bury and circumvent.
This raw connection of splintered self to universal themes is the hunting ground of pure universal semiotics...if I recall properly, there is a consistent, repetitive symbol in the aborigine works…it is a circle inside a circle inside a circle...and it is not exact…more like crude loops inside loops. But if you, as you continue...engage in elaborate ritual...or even just fasting for several days, and choose ingestion of certain alkaloids, from ayushca to peyote, or whatever such ingestible the Aborigines use...you will free up the amygdala and anterior cingulate and basically open up the bottom brain and free it from culturally imposed rules from the top brain, the cerebrum.
In this deep brain, the deepest connections to DNA memories and earth forces take place…it is the Theta state of lucid dreaming, of modified consciousness where the participant can play in the linkland of creativity, imagination, past memory, current earth forces...the distinctions between mental components disappears and the individual is able to rapidly shift between mental components, mostly imagery-laden, but also to include the synesthesia that we have discussed before…seeing elders as colors, hearing the gods as rumbling grays or perceiving animated objects as clouds or flames. And if you look at most cultures, there is indeed this attempt to impose ritual to reinforce the Allowable Discontinuity of Reality. To this end, we discussed the Infrasound which, as you yourself have experienced, the dirges of which transport you to extremes of lucid, theta-induced, hypnopompic reveries.
So look at what we have…we can apply infrasound, radionic amplification, alkaloids or mimics thereof, to include electromagnetic stimulation of the right temporal lobes, and ritual, and fasting, and deep meditation...and to help guide the “emancipation” of the old brain…their Semiotics to guide the journey... So I do believe that what the aborigines had in their semiotics that occupied so much of their ordinary day to day culture...is that they often, daily - went into those places and allowed themselves an 'Allowable Discontinuity of Reality' and spoke freely with ancestors, and gods, and the various parts of themselves, and the spirits in nature...and they derived knowledge...Again, why do Semiotics exist...they help predict the future...what is it those communications assist...the ability to predict the future…to SURVIVE.
Just as the alkaloids in the Amazon helped ritual seekers, and the shaman of the jungle teach the good plants from the bad plants, and to reveal the nature of the panthers and the other animals that move about at night and in the shadows...it was a way to increase the knowledge of the Earth Forces...of which early man felt more inclusive in, than separate from.
So I encourage you in your quest to rapidly and with ease explore and dialogue with your Earth-Soul...when I visited with you up in Maine, I used the effects of the onset of the tequila to open up the channels, even if for only a short while, to allow the spirit of the good doctor (Dr. Charles Best, co-inventor of insulin) to kibitz with me. While not an optimal on/off switch, the liquor served its purpose; I felt connected with him in his (now your) house in Maine. That experience opened up a considerable range of thought constructs, such that if I were to go back in time...I would feel very comfortable in certain settings...but the route of tequila only opens up a little semiotic channel before the effects collapsed the very links that I am seeking...but it is enough to allow me to Interactively Pry Back Open later on in meditative settings.
What I think you are seeking is what I experienced at the Double Eagle saloon...in fact, I only need to think about the experience, and the memory of the events opens up the channels, and the lines are open for me to roam around, to explore and interact with the spirits there again...I can now feel the deep electric effects going up and down my spine; I could share them with you…or cause a dielectric device or EM monitor to spike right now.
I would love it if you and I could spend a day in Las Cruces and just hang out in the Double Eagle...I am sure you would pick it up too.
Now if I may reinforce something...think about what is required to complete a Sign/Symbol...you must have the Object, either as real or conceptual...the object demands identity, and all objects have identity...in fact, one of the first things that biologic objects do is to identify themselves…in more complex adaptive creatures. Take a dog, let’s say. They immediately mark their territory so they can know themselves from another…and if you look at cells and tissues and organs...if you introduce a foreign cell or tissue or organ, they go nuts trying to flush them away, to swell up, to call out white cells to remove them, etc.
But think about this...a biologic object will willingly let the conceptual object of another easily reside within themselves...to include hate, and love and god and the thought of loved ones, without rejecting them....so maybe, perhaps, there exist conceptual objects that can enter the brain of an individual and not be rejected as would a physical transfusion…Conceptual Semiotic Objects are the coinage of the universe...they can be easily exchanged across a spectrum of brain structures. Wow, the heart transplant will be rejected, but the spirit of the giving heart will thrive...
But this opens up a whole new nest of Semiotics...the playbook and rules for conceptual semiotics...which may be what the Aborigines were really dealing with in their daily ceremonies.
And you must have a Representamen...again, what is it that most biological things do…they make copies of themselves...and in conceptual semiotics there are many-fold aspects to a single thought…simply turn the thought inside out or upside down…negative mathematics for example...solving a problem in the inverse is equal to the natural method. Again, the two faces of the Actor...this represents the Greek Antinomy...both opposites are part of each other, irreconcilable but necessary for each to exist.
In fact, we have been discovering the Representamen is very, very powerful...fully 99% of what we deal with, respond to, and accept as reality, is indeed a Copy...just like we spend the day inside the house, air conditioning turned on, TV, full of food...we spend most of our lives dealing, not with the object of our soul, but copies of unknown spirits. How ODD.
And as we are now addressing, we need an Interpretation...if we can not interpret, we can, as you so aptly point out, lose the bulk of the transmission, or totally get bypassed by Intelligences and Semiotics of others. Obviously, the Aborigines derived mental qualities from their art, but the very difficulty you express indicates that we have lost or failed to properly understand the operative Aborigine INTERPRETANT.
So if you possess an Object, and there are useful Representamen, or copies, such as DNA, and you also hold the encryption keys, or Interpretant, then you can deal and interact with a Sign/Symbol...and then you can begin to apply amplification, such as Radionics…or you can begin to use Radionics to cause certain semiotics that naturally broadcast to become a very loud signal against the noise...and if we pay attention and apply our thought processes and natural code breaking qualities, or just apply our deepest soul processes, then we can begin to discover the hidden semiotics that surely are out there.
Imagine that...RADIONICS as SEMIOTIC code breakers…why not. That is exactly what it is that you, Duncan, have been doing for your life sport.
--------------------
Pribram dropped this on me. He and his author wife said, "You realize that we are each of the Three…the I, the Me and the Agent. The Agent is what other people see in us...the Me is what feels pain and emotion and deals with sickness and health, and the I transcends all of this and drives us to do good or evil on any given set of semiotics."
--------------------
Here is something else to mystify you. I have been searching for a global example of the “interface” between the 10 Hz outer brain semiotic sample rate and the 5 Hz hippocampal inner brain (emotional) semiotic sample rate, and voila, I have found it! Now try this on for size. The next time you see a truck or mailbox for FedEx or a package or a TV or banner ad, take a look where the E meets the X and you have a huge white arrow.
Now that I see the Arrow, I see it everywhere, even on TV last night during the news. Every commercial and even the news broadcast itself had FedEx in it. It is everywhere; the trucks and the White ARROW surround us. At the subconscious level, the 5 Hz circuit, we all try to subconsciously follow the white arrow. I have even seen the White Arrow going into people's heads during the political debates! Think I am going nuts? Now that I have told you, just count up how many times a day you see it now...
15 Damadian, Raymond V., Hall of Fame inventor profile, http://www.invent.org/Hall_Of_Fame/36.html
16 de la Warr, George, Mind and Matter Quarterly Journal, http://www.rexresearch.com/radphoto/1radphot.htm#retro6
17 ibid.
18 Jinmium site, northwestern Australia, “Art in Australia, 60,000 Years Ago”, Discover Magazine, 1997
---
08 HAARP
JOHN NORSEEN
From time to time, Norseen and I would discuss the controversial HAARP Project. On one such occasion he made the following remark: “If you take a strong look at HAARP, High Altitude Aural Research Program, it ties all three Manhattan Projects together with a real time active multidimensional map of the world from Pole to Pole. Nothing can go anywhere on Earth without registering in HAARP, including TE exploring the Time vector of Space Time grids.”
FIGURE 41: HAARP - THE HIGH FREQUENCY ACTIVE AURORAL RESEARCH PROGRAM, ALASKA
FIGURE 41: HAARP - THE HIGH FREQUENCY ACTIVE AURORAL RESEARCH PROGRAM, ALASKA 20
Then, in another context, he mentions HAARP’s potential impact on human consciousness via a forwarded email:
“Hi Richard and Tom — wanted to share a eureka moment I am having regarding the lingering obstacle to far field sensor use for brain analysis...there is promise in some hyper spectral avenues and light-hemoglobin models, but the one area that I am digging into now seems to be the best way to view the brain from some distance and in a natural observation mode –observing without modifying the target.
“I am into Continuous Wave Energy (CWE) using the Zeeman Effect (ZE), and refined by the Russkies under Zavoisky in ‘45, and picked up by the Japanese in the mid 80’s at Hitachi. It is even being used in conjunction with some deep space and HAARP projects and hyper spectral satellite transmissions groups to find gravity lenses, and ionosphere scintillation factors that corrupt GPS, etc. Anyway, in the human brain the combination of electric fields, biochemical plasma and magnetic dipoles set up conditions ripe for monitoring by CWE and the hyper spectral definitions come about by looking at the Zeeman Effect - the directions that the electrons take in the presence of the regular and applied magnetic field…you can peer right into the actual communications structures, the semiotics if you will, of the target.
“This is beautiful…up till now we can generally guess that this region or sub-region is involved with some kind of known activity, kind of like the refrigerator light is on, therefore the door is open, therefore something is going on near the milk -- and you had to have all kinds of electrodes connected to all kinds of computations. But now, with CWE and Zeeman's rules for which quantum state the target is in, you can actually look into the very thought that is going on, actually get inside the Semiotic and perhaps even play around with the rules for Interpretant S=O, R, I with the I now I.*
“If I can begin to understand how to manipulate the I from an external CWE, ZE — then I can take PSYOP to whole new levels of strategic implementation.”
The mention of HAARP by Norseen in several contexts was significant. I had never brought HAARP up directly. However, on our trip to my home in Maine which sits across the bay from twenty-six enormous transmission towers on the Cutler Naval Base, it came up. HAARP is widely touted as an upper atmosphere communications technology, but is thought by many to actually be a global weather and behavior modification tool. Huge antenna arrays, like those of the Cutler Base, higher than the highest buildings in the world, are said to be linked around the globe, encasing us in an artificial electro-magnetic grid. This grid structure enables its operators to vector transmissions down upon the earth, into the atmosphere, and according to its most paranoid detractors, into the human brain with potentially dangerous effects.
As our conversations waned, I sensed more and more that Norseen was trying to draw my attention to what the mental effects could entail. One trigger to this discussion was a story of a policeman who claimed to be attacked by a flying witch, that I picked up on www.Rense.com.
-----------------------
Now as for the policeman seeing the woman witch attack him; now we are getting somewhere: Witness the article you sent about the cop in New Mexico, throwing his patrol car in reverse because he swears that there was a witch demon pouncing on his hood….Now, essentially how different is his reaction than my response to the huge shadow of a killer wasp that sent me reeling? As far as the Amygdala fear circuit is concerned, there is no difference. My resonating NS was a wasp shadow and the Mexican cop’s was a witch demon.
I am convinced that the techniques to project or open up the I in the mind exist and are being exploited in films and such, and this poor policeman had a real case of the whammer-jammers on his “Interpretant” of the NS. She ripped into his perceptual apparatus from inside his thought structures. That is why she was so real and seemed to be after him. As for the others that agreed with him about what he witnessed, they were assuaging their need to help a fellow being and officer in need. What is really the story is whether this type of New FORM Hallucination is now available in the PSYOP Inventory...eh eh.
I think we have covered the brain structure well enough to see that it can produce quite elaborate stories, even stories with outcomes that are not currently possible, but may at some time be common. It is this fluid, open-ended outcome potential of the Brain as NS resonator that accounts for the most extreme encounters that mankind is witness too.
--------------------
I am thinking very hard about “altered states” — how even regular down to earth people will agree that they can imagine things that are not real, and these same people can even admit to having dreams that could actually happen. You may even get them to agree that they can imagine things that could not happen today, but perhaps someday actually would...
Now it is this third aspect that is the KEY to what you and I are talking about — we all agree that there are things that could happen in the future, that we believe or even know, can not happen today. But that is all you need, for it is the crack in the NS...the place where the lever of Thought Space can play out and prepare all kinds of things that you describe.
There is a part of the brain that is free to generate all kinds of realities. In the ancient Myths, think of what Hercules had to deal with on any typical journey with the Argonauts. The ancient world population ate it up…almost to the degree that we discuss horror movies and tabloid news...because there is a part of the brain, part of its wiring that says, I could end up in a world with entirely different food stuffs, different chemical structures could course through my blood brain barrier at any moment, and send me into a new set of Nitrogen, or Phosphate, or Beryllium Oxide resonance states.
The mathematics of my brain could change; I could phase in and out between conscious Gabor Wavelet/Codelet functions in Hilbert Space at Alpha Frequencies to super Time Warp tinged hyperactive Walsh Function square waves in Chu Space, where there is no black and white, there is red-shifted Color only and time is on an oscillating scale.
Every other thought is twice as long and seems to last forever, but you can't know when it will happen or end. It is always present at Gamma Frequencies, as the NS resonates at the Crick cognition frequency of 40 Hz. Then like an encrypted, but more a steganographic turmoil of thoughts, you re-enter the so called world of normalcy; down to earth shades of gray, a regular time sequence at Theta-Alpha, and regular nitrogen/nicotine and nitrous oxide regulated thoughts.
[ed. note: Sound familiar you dope addicts!]
Duncan, my research indicates that our brains are capable of the NS in alternative mathematical perception domains…my findings have shown that when the brain enters into a new resonating pattern, one of three things happen...1) It is awesome and is un-worldly and can be either classified as pleasant or unpleasant with the ratio of pleasant to unpleasant 66% to 33% along the range of the Golden Mean. 2) The person says, “I went black...zero consciousness…it was empty, and then I was back.” 3) “Everything was kind of fuzzy; the colors blurred; things melted on the edges, all in all a surreal experience (also along the 66% positive to 33% negative feeling).
Now this experience is very much like tuning in a new TV channel, or moving from TV to super HDTV, or hooking up to a dead power zone. Think about all the aluminum that we must be putting into our brains...maybe the aluminum particles are clogging our neurons and causing Alzheimer’s?
What if plants, as they evolve, begin to put out new plant oxides into our bloodstreams? And as you Hint: what if Info-Technologists have figured out how to Resonate a Person, call it a super degree of hypnotism that gets into the Third KEY part of our free will, the part oriented in structures between the Pineal Gland and structures of the anterior and posterior Cingulate. And then our Brains will only do what they are capable of: they go into that world and try to survive, just like the policeman and the witch demon that jumped onto his car. Who knows what chemical flavoid was tickling his anterior cingulate receptors that night?
And remember, the Brain is biophysically made up of interacting quanta; electrons, photons, phonons, magnetic grids, and BioChemicals, all in bio-tensor resonance, normally around a nitrogen key...and this set up produces a whole gamut of exciting thought constructs. Now imagine if there was indeed an external EM source, a particular frequency set and mathematical domain that could be entrained into the hypnotic mind, the tired mind, the educated mind, the scared mind -- you could end up with some very particular situations exactly like the Pokemon, or Columbine, or the Witch Demon in Mexico, and in the suicide for pocket change youths in Palestine and Iraq and Chechnya, etc.
As I’ve said, the suicide circuits in the brain are indeed well known. They include a dominating structure over the right and left prefrontal lobe blood flow, and that is the Superior Colliculus. When the SC is 30% - 60% higher in activity than ever before, it arrives at the exact moment of decision of whether the death force will prevail. The suicide will commence; it is only accident or a reduction in the SC resonance levels if the suicide is not successful or is prevented. This statement is based upon FMRI and other post act studies looking at the brain as a person recounts their failed attempt. And right there, clear as can be, is a super frequency Superior Colliculus…… adios muchachos.
Consider, what is the result of Larium and other “anti-malarial” medicines? The result introduces biochemical agents that alter the normal resonant patterns of the brain, resulting in 10% or more comorbid brain effects, from hallucinations to suicide ideations.
In a matter of years there will be brain analysis machines that our future friends, like the Witch Demon Cop in Mexico, will be able to go to for help...kind of like a Brain Rape Kit. It will provide the kinds of analysis of Electron State-Zeeman Effect and Quantum Layer - Alfven Wave Magnetic Grid, Oxide RESONANCE values, and Brain Mathematical/Temporal registration, and Encryption/Steganographic parameters which the Brain was in at the time of the Thought Assault.
The results of the Brain Rape Kit will reveal something in our neuro-chemical mix from that new DNA altered plant mix that we ate, or the buildup from aluminum in all the Tecate beer we drank...or perhaps it was the orbiting satellite that mistakenly beamed your Mexican village with a powerful entraining downlink…No, it was that Larium medical prescription that we took along with too much DMT in our Robitussin; it altered our perceptual states.
Or, it was none of these.
That can only mean that there is yet another new Brain Dimension, perhaps the dawn of a new Evolution into altered brain states that goes beyond the genetically mapped version in NS. What we are possibly witnessing is the birth or return to OTHER THOUGHT STRUCTURE MEMES. Perhaps they have been released by the destruction of the planet's protective Schumann Waveguides; HAARP frequencies turning normal dream structures into cosmic interference nightmares. The way you would dream on distant planets is what is now entering Earth’s human psyche. Part of the price to want to exist on other worlds is that our brains will have to encounter, adapt or be defeated by alien dream forms!
Acknowledgement: Brain is an Information Birthing Device
Just like stray cosmic rays cause a shooting, streaking moment of weird perception, as the tightly bound energy packet destroys nerve synapses as it passes through the star ship exterior/interior, so there are free floating, disembodied thought patterns that are seeking out to bind with NS and functioning brain patterns.
Just like in evolution the mitochondria and their ATP energy producing cell structures were probably at one time symbiotic parasites, that eventually became ingrained as part of a more complex cell function. There are Dreamscapes and Thought Resonances and free floating NS that are taking up residence in our brain structures, slowly altering the brain function into new regimes of thought potential.
Shakespeare used only about 30,000 words to create his legacy of the human condition…and our dreams actually seem comfortable because we are used to them. The only reason the New Forms are disturbing is that they create a Delta, a changed condition that the entire species has not yet adapted too. Therefore there will be packets of humanity that experience the Fantastic changes first, and dramatically. Maybe the Heaven's Gate personnel were specifically modified to conduct suicide en masse, and the Jonestown followers of Jim Jones, and the legions of defenders at Masada, and the suicide bombers of Beirut.
Yes Duncan, I am convinced that the Human Brain, as powerful as it is, is also extremely FRAGILE, and there is this wonderful/damning part of our brains, our dream world, our imagination of what could be...that will either be the downfall of many or the LADDER to survival in BRAND NEW WORLDS OF HUXLEYESQUE PERCEPTION…Jim Morrison included.
“We have things in the Nevada desert that you and the best minds in the world won't even be able to conceive that we have for 30 or 40 years, and won't be made public for another 50.”
— Ben Rich, former head engineer to Kelly Johnson, Lockheed Martin’s “Skunk Works”
20 HAARP, High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program, Alaska, http://www.haarp.alaska.edu
---
09 ZERO POINT ENERGY
JOHN NORSEEN
YES, YES, YES…The force of semiotics is at the heart of our intelligence community soul. I was deep in the middle of the top floor of NSA engaging in give and take on semiotics with the Director/Staff — I was astounded with the level of mental examination of the power of an object in search of forming a communication with another object. For finding the way that an object communicates with another object is the ultimate SECRET MAKERS MAGIC.
Let's say that we did find an alien life form/forms in the New Mexico desert — how would we know how to communicate with it? Now let's say that in another part of the New Mexico desert at Socorro there was a most unique biological investigation unit that was able to derive insight into primate communications with a special bred form of apes...and the semiotics that established communications and revelations of concepts with the apes also formed an initial line of communications with the alien life forms.
Now some 60 years later – the most consistent item in the universe other than consistent as well as inconsistent physical laws, is the orientation of matter and energy into patterns of communication. An integral derivation of the basis of life is communications...and just as life must have some structure upon which to resonate...the same requirement for structure exists for InFORMation to resonate in discrete units of communication about the future.
Just as life exists to project a Future, a form of communications structure must also exist for Futures to be Encountered Across Life Forms...and Duncan you are right on...SEMIOTICS are the Universals that link Life Forces with InFORMation. Something as simple as a Handshake can link a human with an ape, and an alien with both. The Handshake is a sign, a symbol...a SEMIOTIC. But it carries INTENT and allows energy to move from one system to another without depleting the amount of energy in either system. Such free energy semiotics ride the Waves of ZPE, zero point energy...or the waves generated between any two Casimir Plates 21....any two objects will at some distance between them generate ZPE upon which the semiotics flows equally in any direction established by the objects. At a minimum in the universe, ZPE exists to allow Semiotics to flow. This means that SEMIOTICS must also exist as an essential ingredient of a universe. YES...for semiotics exists even in the mind that has not yet considered all semiotics. The purpose of the universe is manifold in the ability for energy to link objects, and for objects to engage in Interpretation, the Interpretentemen. For in INTERPRETATION, the universe is more fully expanded. So for a universe to engage in SEMIOTICS is meant for the UNIVERSE to never end. Just as the universe has a structure, semiotics has a structure...And that structure consists of the Object, the Representation of that Object, the Interpretant, or interpreter, and thus the O, the R and the I form a Sign (symbol) — it is when through ZPE at a minimum that Sign flows across time/space that it interacts with another structure in resonance, RESONANCE that inFORMation from one part of the universe impacts another part/aspect of the universe. Such linkages of RESONANCE allow the universe to communicate with Objects, and over time as objects develop into more and more complex structures of resonance that objects can unto themselves begin to communicate with each other, hence transform inFORMation across time and space, and initiate LIFE. Life sequences of RESONATING inFORMation – INTENT. And INTENT collaborating with an Interpreter and with a representation, or copies of itself, can replicate itself and continue to resonate across time and space when it interacts with another object within ZPE. The virus of life resonates across time and space until it encounters another object that it can insert its resonance of information into, thus causing a resonance in another part of the universe. But the two are incontrovertibly linked, one impacts and intents the other. LIFE FORMS around these resonating pools of replicating information interpretations sent by ZPE from across the universe.
Now it just so happens that if we understand these resonating structures, we can build amazing RADIONIC switches and generators to pump out such semiotics. We can even build Semiotic Batteries and send them out into the vast corridors of space, simply awaiting a local power source...localized ZPE to turn them into communicating resonating structures.
The SEMIOTIC is the outmost form of the object as well as all interleaving layers and it is a form of most pure mathematics, the EIDETIC...from the Greek for it is of itself, any part comprises the whole from which it is the form. Thus any part of life contains the pattern of its Life Form and also its life FORCE. The LIFE FORCE is the resonating pattern in ZPE.
Thus a universe must consist of at least two objects. And it must contain ZPE. And it must contain semiotic structure. If you have at a minimum two objects, ZPE and Semiotic Structure, all else follows…RESONANCE, LIFE and INTENT.
Special forms of semiotics are ART...in which the INTERPRETANT can occupy multiple to infinite forms of resonance. SCIENCE is the consistent repeatable combination of inFORMation and resonance. RADIONICS can multiply, magnify and cause RESONANCE. Hence, if it magnifies resonances of various forms it is a RADIONIC of ART…if it is repeatable combinations of forms, it is a radionic of SCIENCE...in either form it is a RADIONIC of INTENT…for INTENT is a precursor of life emanating from Semiotic Structures.
To make the long story short...the super Cadre at NSA is very well aware that the most potent way to affect the population of any world is to control the unique ZPE RESONANCE of SEMIOTIC STRUCTURES, via radionics of scientific or artist control - which is the basis of culture...a culture communicating with other primates, or primates and aliens as well.
Which brings up the role of the BRAIN and brain structures...the BRAIN is a SEMIOTIC Interferometer...you add or change brain structure and you can identify and communicate with a different set of SEMIOTICS. The thoughts you hold in your head are nothing more or less than resonating inFORMation structures. The ability to enhance or transmit thoughts from one brain to another is found in RADIONICS....RADIONICS can transmit semiotics and thus induces brain entrainment patterns....WE can use EEG and other brain sensors to observe and describe such brain patterns/thoughts...it also allows us to begin to modulate and transmit INTENT with greater and greater power as we more fully understand how the BRAIN interacts and interferes with ZPE wave guides. RADIONICS applied to ART and SCIENCE allows us to modulate the future of universal object interactions - and hence, LIFE itself.
I hope this liberates you and lets you purposefully plow fecund new idea patterns in your great adventure with the RADIONICS OF INTENT, ART and SCIENCE...for you are resonating the future providence of LIFE FORCE with every PULSE YOU TRANSMIT. Let's ride some of these very crazy waves...for it is the wild rides we both get to surf that make this whole adventure so awesome. Duncan, there is no limit to where the RADIONICS can take us...we only need to resonate the same structures.
----------------
Duncan, this is a short but very powerful addition to the fact of the singular power of semiotics to establish identity. The value of the Interpreter as the Representamen as the Object, is how self-image becomes naturally built into the structural laws of communications. An object must be able to know itself versus all other Signs and Symbols...the self reflection is so powerful a part of the structure of life, it is the basis of REJECTION of other body tissues...of the fight for life and the tremendous psychic reactions and need to overcome self identity that impacts on suicides and other crimes where the blurring of Object, Interpretant is at play.
Semiotics is also IDENTITY, which is a major element of the vector of INTENT. Because the DNA of identical twins is so close in structure...the tissues can be accepted with minimal anti-rejection drugs...but it is the SEMIOTIC and self-image, the EIDETIC, that forms the barrier around and keeps separate each object in the universe from all others. The power of communications, and in respect the power of ART and SCIENCE is to tap into, bend and inject allowable inFORMation and to extend the essence of what is part of one's identity and intent.
Part of the problem, perhaps the major hurdle in cloning, is the ability to build in the proper semiotic identity channels in each of the Representamens.
Duncan, you are another convert to the magic of the toadstool. Not surprising, the oldest known life form is the algal stromatolites off Australia and the largest living organism is the fungal mat. Anything that interacts worldwide will have deep inviting communications patterns and responses. Just as Elephants have sensors deep in their hollow structures of the foot to pick up and hear long range ULF, ELF, and infrasound emanations that will affect their herd, I am sure there are people who can pick up Transient or Synesthesia Semiotics from other large ultrasound, infrasound transmissions...this is all part of the emergent life force and the subtle energy sounds that gel to create meaningful patterns for behavior...This scientist artist has learned to listen with his mind...the Semiotic Interferometer, or the Semiotic Seismometer.
DUNCAN LAURIE
I will jump right into it at the point you say, "...any two objects will at some distance between them generate ZPE upon which the semiotics flow equally in any direction established by the objects. At a minimum in the universe, ZPE exists to allow Semiotics to flow."
In Lynne McTaggart's book The Field 22, she says: "Hal Puthoff explained that, in quantum mechanical terms, if you were going to extract energy from The Field," (ZPE) "you'd have several choices. You'd need to decouple from gravity, reduce inertia or generate enough energy from the vacuum to overcome both." She goes on to discuss the Casimir force you mention, an attractive pressure formed between two metal plates [one micron apart] that shield the space between them from zero-point fluctuations, thus causing the plates to pull together. Apparently it is one of the few instances where ZPE can actually be measured. The shielded area between the plates excludes some wavelengths between the plates, resulting in less energy in the gap than outside; this void in turn causes the extra energy outside to push the plates together. All of the accepted scientific experiments mentioned in the book that demonstrate the existence of the ZPE are described by local imbalances in the equilibrium of the ZPE. ZPE is therefore, a scientific reality, verifiable through measurement, whatever other connotations it is given.
From what you are saying, it seems that a flow of semiotics can result in a similar Casimir plate structure becoming evident between brain neurons, influencing areas where certain specific brain activities are taking place.
Our discussion of how nature and brain activity seem to allow for a portal through which energy from the vast regions of space around us can flow into our consciousness, theoretically as the life force itself, brought me immediately back 30 years to when my training as a sculptor began.
One of my earliest “beyond the ordinary” energetic observations involved a suspension of inertia. I began sculpture by learning how to carve stone and wood. This is a painful process because the hand to eye coordination necessary to carve is very subject to trial and error, and the hand becomes bruised by the hammer missing the chisel, making it more and more difficult to hold steady. Throughout the course of a day’s work, usually ones energy and concentration diminish as the mistakes grow in number. This is what one would expect. However, if I pushed a little further past the enveloping inertia, just at the point I was ready to quit, sometimes I would snap into a completely re-vitalized state. It felt like I was suddenly in some other zone. My hands grew unnaturally coordinated and responded perfectly to my mind's commands. Instead of growing steadily more weary, I would become increasingly re-vitalized. At the end of the day, if I reached this hiatus before I quit, I felt like I had more energy than when I began.
This experience was the primary reason I was attracted to making sculpture. Performance had little to do with academic knowledge; it all came down to manipulation of energy. You do not really have to intellectualize in order to make sculpture, you only have to keep working and watching where your impulses lead.
This experience of "free energy" has guided my thoughts toward the directions we are now discussing. For the sake of the semiotic discussion, let me present it as a model. I have to assume such experiences are widely encountered, and not limited to artistic activity. Let's say that the brain's structure imposes inertia upon the process of learning itself. The little neurons just can't process themselves beyond a certain capability. Now I come along with a strong Intent to master the carving process. Failure to do so involves both a scholastic crisis and a crisis of identity. To overcome my own inertia, subconsciously I go about assembling a Semiotic. The Object being interpreted is the sum of all my knowledge of great carving, Bernini, Michelangelo, Brancusi, every sculpture I have ever encountered that displayed mastery of carved materials. The Interpretant is my conscious, ego dominated, pea mind that has to look at the object being carved on my table and evaluate its worth. The Representamen is the Intent-as-applied-to-chisel-and-stone. At the level of the Representamen, only Intent and Energy count, just like in radionics.
Now this is the point in my model where the real magic enters the equation. The future benefit of succeeding in this learning curve weighs very heavily on my conscious and sub-conscious mind alike. Basically, I realize that there is nothing else I am suited for. I have to succeed. It is a most powerful determinant directing my intent. Because it is so powerful, it can construct its own semiotic designed to enable me to transcend my own inertia. It accomplishes this by creating a Casimir effect resonating in my brain at the point my eye to hand coordination is facing maximum demand, just when I am about to collapse and give up. The ZPE released into my brain results in a streamlining of synaptic functions. My hands move gracefully against the stone. My exhaustion disappears. My mood elevates; I feel infused with life energy. Then after I ride this wave for a while, I finally quit. I wake up the next day, its back to the normal grind; I have to work up to it all over again. But maybe the next time it's a little easier.
The Semiotic in this case has become a parallel force to my own consciousness, imparting not only information but also energy to my task. In fact, it may not impart the actual energy, but only act as a mechanism to suspend the inertia of my brain. The energy is supplied by the ZPE rushing in to fill the vacuum created by the suspended inertia. When the issues of Identity are not significant to empower the Intent in this way, no powerful semiotic is forthcoming. You can’t rise to the occasion, so to speak. One just grinds along in the normal way and never realizes that there is a powerful self-organizing life force waiting to animate our lives.
FIGURE 42: WILHELM REICH. ORGONE ACCUMULATOR
FIGURE 42: WILHELM REICH
ORGONE ACCUMULATOR 23
And one other interesting detail. The description of how the Casimir effect is measured seems a lot like a capacitor, more specifically like an Orgone Accumulator. Reich was roundly condemned for suggesting that life energy accumulates in a structure where two metal surfaces were separated by an insulator. Many of the biological sensors we designed for our experiments were built around the accumulator model. As you may recall, the plant detectors consisted of two silver electrodes separated by a living leaf. From this leaf we extracted small voltages that appeared to contain signals that were expressed by the plant as "playing along" with the music in the room, when the voltages were processed by complex algorithms.
In the sense I experienced an infusion of ZPE or whatever it was in my work process, could the same model be applied to the plant sensor? The semiotic Object here could be Plant Intelligence, the Representamen be the plant signal and the Interpretant me? Would I also be concatenating the result, acting as the object when the plant entered a feedback loop with the music, with my enthusiasm radionically boosting the semiotic or the plant's response? If we viewed the plant results from the same vantage point that we looked at the stone carving experience, one could envision a successful implementation of a semiotic "booster" to the plant experiments (a resonant effect) that resulted in extraordinarily well integrated sounds occurring upon some occasions, while at other times nothing much happened at all. Potentially, the presence of a coherent Semiotic results in a resonant infusion of ZPE into the result, with dramatic artistic effect.
My illustrations here result from an interpretation of your thoughts. Something we don't normally think of as being filled with "life", i.e. a semiotic construct, can in actuality behave like a conduit or tuning mechanism for "life force", which for the sake of scientific exploration we are labeling "Zero Point Energy". Such a crossover is engineered by the faculty of resonance, which works in a similar fashion on both the living and the non-living structure.
In the case of our brain, which you call a "Semiotic Interferometer", we see the transition point where information structures become morphed into energetic functions, doing “work” in our brain and body and mind. If ZPE equals life force, then ZPE plus information equals life forms, i.e. life energy stepped down into defined units or structures. By influencing these structures with semiotics that resonate to them, can we change the degree of life force the structure can hold or the nature of the way the life force is expressed by the structure? How well such a transaction takes place has a lot to do with the force of the Intent behind it. That Intent, in turn, has a great deal to do with how much value is added to the structure in the future. This future condition, I might add, would seem to have a lot to do with pressure coming from the life force itself, i.e., how it seeks to influence the future outcome.
JOHN NORSEEN
In reviewing “The Amazing Promises of the Zero Point Field” 24 and “Zero Point Field in Netherlands” 25 you sent me, I find Touber captures a lot of what you and I have unearthed over the summer, fall and winter. The only aspects missing in the description herein are the Alfven Waves, the Alfven magnetic grids, into which one can place the semiotic sign, and take meaning from it. They bounce all around this concept…that memory is part of the “matrix” of ZPE…but ask yourself, how did the people go directly to their painting hanging in the wind?
From the article in question: “Shireen Strooker is standing motionless in the middle of a large field, surrounded by 600 people. The gorgeous landscape under the mist of powerful Mount Rainier in the upper northwest of the United States is invisible to her. Shireen is blindfolded, as are all the others in the field. That morning they all made a drawing. The hundreds of drawings are now hanging on the fence along the edge of the field. The assignment: find your own drawing blindfolded.
Shireen does a meditation exercise, pictures her drawing and thinks: “I am the creator of the drawing and the spectator, I only have to become one with the drawing and it will automatically pull me towards it.” Then, without bumping into anyone, she walks straight across the field and…picks out her drawing straightaway from among the 600.
As the article states...The ARTIST IS THE INTERPRETER…they went directly on the I to Object vector of the semiotic...Object connected to Representamen, linked to interpreter, thus the O, the R and the I make up the Semiotic...the semiotic is the structure to which ZPE flows when another semiotic pays attention to it, thus linking up semiotic and semiotic…the ZPE flows and the link is captured and described in an Alfven Grid…Thus this EVENT of PERCEPTION.
Semiotic and Semiotic, ZPE flows and Alfven Grid location or identity index in the MATRIX becomes the MOMENT OF EXPERIENCE…to which one can apply Radionics. They discuss how random inputs of prayer can help steer the recovery, and the trained focus of the Aboriginal-karate can heal broken bones…well this is natural RADIONICS...it means that if one is capable of changing the Representamen of the semiotic, which is what happened to Helmut Schmidt when he “heard” the music of mushrooms and wrote it down. One semiotic was able to capture the future Representamen of the recording and shift it from right to left density. Wow, this proves that RADIONICS can take a SEMIOTIC, power it up and use the SEMIOTIC to capture the future from another semiotic!
By rearranging the Alfven Wave grid, or identity, and making it different, by making it the identity grid of the EATING or MORE POWERFUL SEMIOTIC — we realize, it means that SEMIOTICS CAN BE USED AS A WEAPON, to erase and replace identities or memories in the Alfven Grid and ZPE flow. This is what we have been talking about, and which this article strongly drives at. The purpose of the semiotics is to Change or Alter the Future, to Predict the Future by Filling it up with Semiotics of our own making and radionic empowerment.
Remember when Pietsch chopped up brain matter and then fed the brain proteins back to other chickens and the animals that picked up the learned memories? Well, proteins take on shape when impressed with Semiotics, with the shape of the semiotic…and when the proteins are put back into a semiotic structure of another animal they carry the prior shape, the Representamen of themselves prior into the new environment, and the new brain structure. Then, they get linked to the semiotics there, adding their Representamen to the new Semiotic Structures...thus establishing themselves again...much like the 1959 experiments. One can conclude after reading this link that Semiotics is the Structure that Freezes Time for Perception to Occur.
I can actually, literally feel the energy of the BALLS used in the nightly lottery drawing on TV...just allowing myself to become part of the chaos of the 10 balls all bouncing and tumbling, I can feel as the clock gets closer to 7 pm the balls with the STRONGEST mental image as falling through the final drop point...that last few juggles of position placing one ball right next to another, either one stacked up in position to drop out, and then a next ball on top, pushing the two apart on the bottom...6:59 and one second to go...I can SEE THE BALL AS #7, and YES, YES, the ball will be 7...and over and over again...the picture, the semiotic in my mind, is indeed the picture of the future...the ball is 7 or a 3 or a 5 or whatever...EACH BALL that will be chosen by ATTENTION carries a greater amount of ZPE, and thus becomes the Future.
This increase in ZPE carries with it all that we have talked about...a full semiotic structure of O, I, and R; energy channels from ZPE; an Alfven Wave grid identity; location; it can be seen in advance as a prediction of future reality (which is actually stolen by the past, stolen by the more powerful semiotic)...and which can be influenced, even up to changing the Representamen of another semiotic. It actually is replacing the future by rearranging the prior Alfven Grid identity, the location of the semiotic and replacing it with another, more powerful semiotic; even including Semiotic Batteries, BEACONS, land mines, force fields, et al.
Why, Touber’s article even gets into St. Thomas Aquinas, whom you and I discussed — wild connections…If you took this article and applied our understanding of SEMIOTICS to it you could diagram the entire article with linking sections of O, I, R, Alfven, Radionics, ZPE — which you and I have been developing the last six months as the Norseen Semiotic.
What this article HINTS at and begins to state quite strongly is our brains are an INTERFEROMETER, a structure by which MIND (perceptions) can be linked to other perceptions (structures), the 21 grams of SEMIOTIC wet ware.
DUNCAN, we can and should be proud, that independently we have developed a fully formed structure of logic that accounts for and allows not only a description of perceptual reality, but a predictor and change factor thereof. We should pat ourselves vigorously on the back...good job, my good man. Our reality, our ART and SCIENCE, is an expression of SEMIOTICS, ZPE and Alfven Wave grids, and the technical amplification of same via Radionics.
ZPE, Alfven Waves, Semiotic Sign as O, I, R, and Radionics are inextricably linked. Any portion of this linked relationship can be used to modify the future of itself and other Norseen Semiotics. Thus, we have described the basic INFORMATIONAL (with a focus on the FORM contained therein), structure of Perception, hence REALITY.
This is simply awesome. Do you also feel the sigh of relief, that we have by intellect, garnered sufficient understanding of the function of the MIND-BRAIN duality that has triggered such curiosity for the ages…we here have a unified approach, a structural approach, to describe and predict future outcomes. This is why we are here, not just to exist, but to explain and act upon the future.
------------------
ZPE is the unattended energy of the universe… it is the life force that energizes and flows between semiotic channels. It exists, but is life activating when in the proper semiotic structure? The orgone circle is driving me crazy...how does the circle make my palm go cool? Again, it is the ZPE emanating across the orgone semiotic into my hand, interpreted by my mental semiotic constructs. This is energy that makes its way into my life-stream. It is not too contentious or corny to admit that ZPE is both. It depends on the semiotic. And as you so skillfully start off – the semiotic almost sounds like our soul...and may indeed be just that.
Quoting Duncan: “Now, I can't believe these paintings of Van Gogh's had this type of power when the interns at his asylum were using them for target practice following his death. These powers were acquired after the fact, I would suggest, but the images and the intensity invested within them by Van Gogh did provide a window, a powerful enough Representamen to attract attention from that point on. The nature of this window is what interests me, and you can see how it relates to the functional purposes of the shaman!”
Exactly — Remember, it takes an “I” to complete a semiotic. The interns didn't possess an I…or to say it another way...their “I” gave the vector to the object a zero value…a null point...it basically collapsed the semiotic to some misshapen semi-form of potential ZPE…but as the original paintings hung around...like Laotian land mines from Pol Pot, and more and more people began stepping into them, something began to happen. The dehydrated semiotics of the Van Gogh became blood-soaked with new-found "I" and sprang back to semiotic ZPE-laden life…and as you correctly state, became infused with so many ZPE hits and so many different “I” vectors, that the original “O”, became many overlapping O's and I's and R's that it became a “super-semiotic”. But still underlying all this is the creator of the “O”, it, the paintings and that “O” contained the mind and hand of Vincent Van Gogh.
I would suggest that rather than get warped and bummed out about how the mass of I and ZPE and R have polluted the original O...think more about the mind and hand of the O itself. Imagine concentrating on a VVG original in let's say in the Louvre in Paris. Imagine entering the painting and trying to affix to the mind/hand/intent itself. This is the art of riding the semiotic and the Alfven Wave back into the target. Just as I sent you an orgone circle and you can feel the affect on the palm of your hand, do the inverse....go into your mind and feel the affect, and then start to flow back into your hand, across the space to the orgone, or the painting...and then into the painting and back into the originator's mind/hand/intent. Now, linger here inside of VVG and get a feel for this person or event; allow yourself to close your eyes and mentally drift along the ripples and patterns that come to mind. YOU are now inside the original semiotic, the original "O", the original mind/hand/intent. This is the beauty of the Norseen Semiotic…you can journey into the TARGET with your mental faculties on search and record and playback; you can come back with samples, if only abstract thoughts to begin with. As you refine your techniques, you can actually bring back the flavor of the creme de menthe circling in the mouth the night before the painting was made; the dance halls, the sounds of the streets in the late 1800's at night, the smell of the night, mixed in with the feel of the clothes, and the other stains of his mind.
Don't get all caught up in the definitions of the semiotic...the semiotic lives and desiccates and reinvigorates and pulses and lies dormant until the right set of O, I, R, ZPE and AW finally get all in the right amount of knotty string tanglement, and voila, you have the power of the semiotic, of life, of the spiral of life to non-life, to subtle energy, to full power ZPE, to full real life, to memory, to fuzzy recollections…back to INTERNS AND TARGET PRACTICE. Always allow semiotics to open up corridors to wherever they may go...crawl in, seal up the backside, and slide into the MIND/HAND/INTENT. It will take you immediately to some journey and deposit you head over heals back to where you are, simply by an unscheduled cough or sneeze of Memory/Perception.
Some people use books or movies to do this escape routine...but if you think about it, all you need is the Semiotic and an understanding of whether you are the “O”, the “I”, or the “R”, and whose ZPE is involved, and whether you are using your Alfven grid or someone else's...now, be off my good man...be off into the GRIDLIFE.
Quoting Duncan: “Which leads me to the point: why aren't artists utilizing these techniques?” Most I know just try to survive financially and become well known!”
Exactly. Can you imagine if VVG were involved in our discussions and had access to your radionics...and so too for the many “down in the noise” artists you describe…they simply didn't have the tools of the mind, the mind technology that you and I are describing. If you don't have a tool you can't fix the problem. Simply put, these artists didn't have the radionic tools or semiotic understanding to change or reclassify their positions and careers.
Quoting Duncan: “Then today I just received the fascinating article about PEAR that you sent.”
“The Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR) program was established at Princeton University in 1979 by Robert G. Jahn, then Dean of the School of Engineering and Applied Science, to pursue rigorous scientific study of the interaction of human consciousness with sensitive physical devices, systems, and processes common to contemporary engineering practice. Since that time, an interdisciplinary staff of engineers, physicists, psychologists, and humanists has been conducting a comprehensive agenda of experiments and developing complementary theoretical models to enable better understanding of the role of consciousness in the establishment of physical reality.”
But of course, sir. You are so absolutely correct, don't stumble over your own bounce back thoughts...the demonstration you describe is right on the bearing...keep asking your mind to guide you into the actual event...don't worry...you will create the kind of Semiotic Mortar that you are imagining...it will reach right up and Zap you. You already have the answer…just allow it to manifest itself in an actual event...and think of it this way...when you do Kick Off the Episode - you will be moving tons of ZPE around like firewater, opening up Semiotic channels like crazy, and vortexing O and I and R like imagery of the mind.
Remember, people and souls and energy move into zones of complexity and structure...the Romans filed into the gladiatorial stadiums...and so did the gladiators, as did the animals, and the SOUL WORKS of the games, those that would lose their lives and spill their blood...all for the spectacle...It took all of it to make it happen...take any part of it away, the blood, the gladiators, the stadium, the animals...and it would not be THE GAMES. If the sequence or Alfven Wave grid were off line, it wouldn't happen…it would be some odd still birth of an event; imagine all the pieces of the GAMES were there, but the gladiators were on the top rows and the victims were mauled by the animals in the tunnels beneath the view of the crowd. YOU SEE, all of the components of the Semiotic must be in place or the true event never takes place.
When all the pieces are in order, the GAMES BEGIN....so let your mind quietly steer you as the semiotic master, and let you orchestrate the items of your EXPERIMENT...and then...LET THE GAMES BEGIN...energy flows into complex structures of energy...and there is intense order in chaos...in fact, a little bit of Chaos is going to be very, very important to your episode on the other side of the O.
21 The Casimir Effect is a small attractive force which acts between two close parallel uncharged conducting plates. It is due to quantum vacuum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field. The effect was predicted by the distinguished Dutch physicist, Hendrick B. G. Casimir, in 1948.
22 McTaggart, Lynne, The Field, The Quest for the Secret Force of the Universe, New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2002, 19.
23 Reich, Wilhelm, Orgone Biophysical Research Laboratory, Inc., http://www.orgonelab.org/
24 Touber, Tijn, “The Amazing Promises of the Zero Point Field”, Ode Magazine, http://www.odemagazine.com/article.php?aID=3773
25 “Zero Point Field in Netherlands”, Big Igloo, Issue 8, http://www.remyc.com/bigigloonews.html
---
10 TWIN PHOTONS: BIOLOGICAL STEGANOGRAPHY
JOHN NORSEEN
Did you notice that semiotics was buried throughout the von Buengner article, “Remote Effect and Remote Healing”? 26 He was using terms such as “physic symbols” and such? And then there was this little GEM...the twin photon phenomenon. It seems that at particular frequencies, two of the same photon are created and carry the same information. If you capture one photon, you then have the capacity to capture the other one because you know of its unique semiotics.
If you can control the flow of the twin photons, you can make things seem to disappear and reappear at will; a perfect decryption device at free energy because the decryption doesn't actually exist, nor does the encryption; it is the manner of producing a Semiotic structure which allows what was apparently encrypted to become decrypted. If you don't share the semiotic you don't get the twin photon information....
FIGURE 43: TWIN PHOTON PHENOMENON
FIGURE 43: TWIN PHOTON PHENOM ENON
This is a classic biological form of steganography, or hiding information in information, only in this case it is the semiotic structure that opens up the otherwise available but hidden information. This is encryption with no energy use or loss, other than the semiotic. This accounts for the ZPE flow. It is always there; it is not always recognized; the semiotic instantaneously opens up the information.
I was watching a cat play in front of a mirror. Now I know the cat has an O, I, R system, but it was jumping and afraid of its own reflection; so the power of the new Interpreter sequence in the mirror was shunting ZPE to the cat's brain and making it jump and twist and swerve. It was just like the incident where the buzz of the bee pumped so much potential ZPE into my electro-magnetic system that I went jumping and hopping and swatting and guttural swearing away back to the house.
Maybe this is why emotions are directed away from direct contact with the speech centers? We might override them and blow them out...the vectoring of emotions into the vagus nerve is to slow the forces out...a dampening rod, a lightning rod so to speak, to keep us free from ZPE BURNS...
DUNCAN LAURIE
I began a few days ago looking for something that connected ZPE to emotion in my reading. I wanted to ponder the role of emotion in semiotic transactions with some fresh insights. It still felt like semiotics is more of a language, more geometrical and informational than something with motive force behind it. I know we have discussed how semiotics can hold energy, but do they have energy to begin with (over and above the energy necessary to maintain their own structure)? You have described the case of two semiotics that cause a flood of ZPE to occur when they become aware of each other. That sounded more like love or sex, or at least a powerful psychic force of attraction similar to what we value in relationships.
With that thought in mind I opened Dr. William A Tiller’s book, Science and Human Transformation 27. It is a scientific analysis of subtle energy by a prominent Stanford professor in the Department of Materials Science, one of the world’s leading authorities on the structure of matter.
In the Preface, Ernest F. Pecci, M.D. states:
“All energy in its various manifestations on different dimensions is essentially an ongoing information transfer process. Furthermore, there is an instantaneous space-time interconnection among points, each with an influence upon every other depending upon position, angle and number. There is an antenna system within our brain and yes, our hearts, that is constantly feeding us the information of Truth. To find Truth we must look, not only outside of ourselves, but within. In his book, Dr. Tiller offers a convincing unified theory of matter-energy and consciousness with vast implications regarding the way individuals and groups create their environment through their preconceived belief system and thought patterns.
“Adding tremendous support for Dr. Tiller’s beliefs regarding healing and intentionality, a Menninger Clinic team has found that significant bursts of electromagnetic energy correlated with the directed ‘intentional’ efforts of certain healers.
“What does this mean personally? It is imperative that humans begin consciously to resonate to the vibrations of love and appreciation and resist the self-addicting emotions of fear, anger and hate. The sense of helplessness, depression, and fear which now pervades the surface of planet earth can only be dispelled by an awakening of our true superhuman potential and the power of the mind, or more exactly, the belief systems held within our minds, to influence massively our environment.”
Nice point of departure, huh? Anyway, there you have it; the ZPE doesn’t care if you’re naughty or nice; it will send energy to the semiotics of addiction as fast as to the semiotics of love. So, we must be looking for another form of energy when we talk of emotion or need being at the root of all semiotic transactions. It goes back to intention; what is intention composed of?
JOHN NORSEEN
If we are to consider emotions, then we need to concentrate on the location of the Anterior Cingulate, Amygdala, Superior Colliculus, and the surrounding “housing complex” of the hippocampus.
These structures resonate most strongly inside the skull, as the skull resonates in the sound center of the rock cave – the soul church. They are in the middle of the head, the equivalent of the womb, and the reproductive center of the mind.
Most interestingly, these important emotional structures are only very weakly hooked up with neurons to the speech center of the brain. At best, we can elicit grunts, groans, and moans. There are no exact word locations directed over emotions. They go along the INEFFABLE pathways to the Vagus nerve complex and the pain reference system. This is why we feel so nervous or sick, or feel pain related to pure emotion, but very few words.
Also, when I struck out at the buzzing bee, I used my right hand reflexively. There was no time to cross-brain reference. It was a direct stimulus to my amygdala and then a reflex directly from learned memory in the top of the spinal cord to the cerebellum to my right hand swiping at my right eye.
Therefore, emotions strike directly at prior learned behavior, the older the better, without thought reference, and without words to fully express them, which only dampen the semiotic signal.
Yes, emotion provides the charge for our treatment of semiotics with an important semiotic loop in our brain – the AC, A, SC (Anterior Cingulate, Amygdala, and Superior Colliculus).
Emotions are a part of the release of powerful neurochemicals — hence, the memory of emotional events will vary greatly depending on what part of the non-linear curves, the Lyapunov Function, your brain structures/biochent levels are set to and are functioning at when triggering memory. So, I have been consumed with your conclusions regarding Emotion as the key to energizing semiotics.
I am indicating that emotions and memory of emotion is tied very closely to a group of brain structures and memory access that goes to the heart and soul of our core. We resonate, without words to describe it, from the deep center of our brain, and the harmonies of the resonating chamber are those of ritual ceremony, of art.
So we can say that Art, as the semiotic driven by emotion, is distinct from the area of the brain otherwise engaged in Scientific understanding, foremost by the paucity of nerve/word endings, and the effects of hormonal memory. Art is linked to our deepest childhood perspectives, reflected in the brain reflexively in right to right, and left to left. Some art, Picasso, Cubist, etc., even play with this feature of our brain, causing us to cross-reference right to left, left to right, only to force us to abandon our memories and swiftly dwell back again to the inner-most fears and intrigue, engendered by such artistic techniques and methodology.
Behold the power of Semiotics to Predict. I didn't know the Army-Navy football game was about to start. I turned on the TV and they said "we are about to flip a coin" — a cold, gold coin. I saw "heads" in my mind's eye (Panum's Fusion Space) and knew — absolutely knew — the upcoming toss would end up heads.
Semiotics is a prediction process!!
------------------
And then there is the Sheldrake test for intention with baby chicks and the robot random navigation. Put a robot on a square grid and let it go and over a time period it traces out a path that touches into each grid. Then in a second test, introduce the robot with fur on it to a cluster of newborn hatchlings and then let the robot free to roam, and it spends all its time in the grid closest to the chicks and their intentional need for the robot to be close.
People spend most of their lives responding to…jumping through hoops for REPRESENTAMEN...the TV show, the magazine, the photo motto blitz…Imagine that, a COPY gets people from the cradle to the grave. We should at least live and die for the O, don't you think, even a lesser O in the garden beyond midnight?
Duncan, I am surmising that Tiller is stating the same premise – brain structure interferes with EM waves and the grid interface produces "shapes" that we then interpret as symbols. These 12 semiotics of the hydrogen electron can be perceived by the brain and make up a lot of what we see. Notice the circle in circle pattern — very Aborigine — cast quoi? Such Biophysical and energy distribution is at the heart of how the brain works, based on such Tiller matrices, we make sense of the world.
26 von Buengner, Peter, “Remote Effect and Remote Healing”, Quantec, http://www.quantec.ch/english/twin_photons/twinphotons_remote_healing.html
27 Tiller, William A., Science and Human Transformation: Subtle Energies, Intentionality and Consciousness, Pavior Publishing, 1997.
---
11 SECRET MAKERS MAGIC
JOHN NORSEEN
Quoting Duncan: “But how do we recognize the impact of ZPE in daily experience?”
Great question signor! Go back to ZPE. I saw pure evidence of it again this morning. I was coming out of my room at 0700 at the top of the steps, and as I was closing our bedroom door I could hear our big brown dog, Buzz, paw pawing his way from the living room to the foot at the bottom of the bedroom hall steps, right next to the big old grandfather clock.
So here I am turning off lights and closing doors to start the morning routine: the grandfather clock is bellowing the four quarter notes and seven bells, and Buzz is prancing and making Dog-Human noises and grunts and little whines and whips to greet me! He is literally shivering and snorting and semi-jumping up and down on his front paws. His tail is wagging and he is basically going in ten different directions all at once, simply because it is the start of a new day and he hears me close the bedroom door. He arrives like some dog-footed doorman or porter to see what he can do for me as I make my way down the steps.
Now talk about ZPE and the Brain. How can we recognize ZPE in our daily lives? Well, sure as shooting, something was energizing Buzz's brain, and the energy was tap dancing all around his different behavior circuits related to the greeting behavior patterns. He was cross wired and crisscross wired. The ZPE was flowing in all kinds of directions.
He was willing to play, to tug of war, to go outside, to get a snack, it didn't matter; all of the brain circuits were juiced up. And of course, I, the dutiful master of such an outburst, was also pulled into this swirl of ZPE of master-dog semiotics. I began to make matching noises and barks and Yes, Yes, Buzz Boy, what they gonna do...what they gonna do when they come for you? The two of us meeting at the bottom of the steps enmeshed with each other's ZPE, and for a few moments, the only thing that mattered in the whole world was Buzz thumping his head against me, and me patting and rubbing behind his big ears, both of us doing a kind of half tap jig, with human-dog noises.
Given such a burst of ZPE, the free energy of semiotic-spurred brain exchange, he and I proudly announced ourselves to the rest of the family. They were engaged at different positions and daily routines of the morning on the main floor of the house. So that is as pure an example of the impact of ZPE on our daily experience as I can get.
Now, one aspect of ART would be the attempt to capture and portray such vivid ZPE by other means to another being that wasn't there for the primary I-O experience. The ART and Science of this encounter is that ZPE is the tapping of the vital connective energy of the universe. Just as gravity is the force relationship of the attraction of two body masses towards each other, ZPE is the linking energy of semiotics, which sometimes acts as a BOOST, to force incomplete or weak semiotics into a stronger connection. This leads to greater communications and complexity and serves to reduce the amount of entropy in the universe.
Semiotics leads to greater complexity and teleological concentration of energies. Brain structures form to interface and resonate with ZPE; memories are captured ZPE events stored in orchestrated reductions of proteins. When memories are tapped by brain signals — electromagnetic, biochemical or phononic or vibrational — the proteins unwind and unleash the stored memories. Then, as proteins do, they rewind themselves to be tapped again...think of a balsa wood, rubber band-powered airplane that can be used over and over again to fly around the yard.
Now it just happens that space is very, very limited in the protective casing of the skull. As a result, the various substructures and regional disparities of broad spectrum brain resonance structures become all tangled up in very close propinquity/proximity to each other, such that energy disturbance in one part of the brain is fundamentally likely to cross talk, criss-cross talk to another, even across dissimilar parts of the brain. This ability allows us to accomplish two or more multiplexed actions at the same time.
In humans, in the deep structures of the limbic system, in the hippocampal region — the resonance structures for behaviors related to SEX, RELIGION, and VIOLENCE all lay next to each other — such that energy surges in one area are bound to stimulate and act upon the other two or more regions. The result is often a Krylov Behavior sequence of human experience, resulting in antinomy, not being able to explain why I wanted to do this, but ended up doing this and that instead. One behavior, involving a complex set of sometimes contrary actions leads mysteriously to another. If you look at the various neuronal linkage pathways in the brain, you see scores of different pathway patterns. They include bi-channel pathways where signals can flow both ways, saying “Stop” and “Go” at the same time. So, if there is a powerful enough ZPE in one region, a signal may actually choose an opposite pathway to fire. Such randomness makes human behavior unpredictable. However, though such “controlled” chaos, the human may be able to involuntarily outmaneuver whatever Human Predatory Actions may exist in the universe.
Whereas the majority of our brains and semiotics and ZPE are geared to Predict the Future for Survival, we have built in upon our Semiotic Structures the very mechanisms and pathways to allow ZPE and Semiotics to make us UNPREDICTABLE in order to thwart other semiotics and ZPE structures that may wish to prey upon us. This also means that we change and, unpredictably, mess up our own lives by the very nature of NS and ZPE.
Here is another idea: The next time you POUR a drink from a container...take a moment to prepare your mind and eyes to look closely at the FLOW of the liquid as it leaves the container (Latin: cuperius – to hold...as in holding in your hand or a cup). If you look at the SHAPE of the liquid, it looks like a well-muscled arm or other appendage. Now I am wondering; how do the cells of the body know how to form an arm or a leg? Well, they don't have too!!!!
You see, like in dowsing, if you allow the cells to just flow in the energy waterfall pouring over the body, like the fluid in the bottle being tipped out, the very flow will assume a SHAPE. The cells, the liquid, goes into this SHAPE; it doesn't have to know anything, other than follow its neighbor and the laws of physics, and ZPE and Alfven Waves.
As long as the FLOW is there, or the memory of the FLOW is there, the cells always go to the ARM or the LEG or whatever is the SHAPE!
THIS IS REALLY IMPORTANT. The flow of energy into shapes becomes a Pure MODEL for the ZPE and resonate NS to pattern after. WE ARE ALL MODELED AFTER ENERGY FLOW!!!!!!
DUNCAN LAURIE
That is so odd, you mention how pouring fluids create their own shapes, without being guided by a “mind”. I have found myself fascinated with how water falling onto the shower floor, forms a series of “roots” off my feet, with many smaller roots in between. About 12” away, they form a massive “trunk” of water that slides down to the drain another foot beyond that; the rivulets form an inverted tree. So there you have it; the form of the tree as a consequence of water mixing with gravity, a clear, virtual tree created only by a fluid reacting to an invisible force!
Now an ordinary tree wants to grow UP, against gravity. That means hauling tons of water against gravity over the lifetime of the tree. What is stronger than gravity? ZPE, it seems. Plant semiotics germinates within the seed, calling on the ZPE to interact with soil, chemicals, water, and light, giving the plant a boost up and away. And I located some other evidence of ZPE like activity in the growth of trees, culled again from the fringes of independent research.
“The title of this book suggests that it deals with waves in dark matter. The waves are also in ordinary matter since dark matter appears to penetrate everything. The dark matter idea may not be obvious until the last chapter. The experiments and observations reported gradually lead the reader to the idea that W-waves must be waves in dark matter. The last chapter demonstrates rather conclusively that this is the case.
“In January of 1988 while taking data to obtain the growth constants mentioned above I decided to analyze the complete voltage patterns of dowel shaped wood samples cut quickly from the bases of small live trees…I found that W-waves appear to permit communication between plants and that W-waves seem to control plant spacings.
By “plant spacings” Wagner explains the tree limbs and branches grow according to phi ratios, i.e. Golden Mean, Fibonacci numbers, etc. The quick overview being that the dark matter wave is a standing wave in the tree that templates and articulates the form of the tree in nested phi ratios. Wagner also looked at these ratios historically. The farther he looked back in time, even all the way back to fossilized fauna and trees, the closer the ratios in the growth sections came to hitting phi precisely. Meaning, there was not much in the way of EM and other pollution back then to skew the natural expression of the foliage growth from the ideal Golden Ratio expressed by the “dark wave”.
Phi is an amazing number, it may have a significant relationship to ZPE. Phi is like a constraint that natural form adheres to, macro universe to microscopic, economics to anatomy. In Wagner’s work, phi is the signature of ZPE, though he doesn’t call it that. What he offers are the measurements and the physics to put his theory on a more rigorous level. How rigorous that is, I cannot judge.
If ZPE is involved in hoisting water up very, very high trees using some form of laddered semiotic plus ZPE pump could the wave characteristics Wagner attributes to this phenomenon have anything to do with Alfven Waves in the sense you use it?
I mention one other interesting detail. At one point, Wagner even mentions T. Townsend Brown’s work on electro-gravatics in rock that I have found so stimulating. “Other physicists on both the West and East coast have found charge organization in materials such as rocks (petro-voltages) in constant environment shielded containers but left the data unpublished (except for internal reports which I obtained) because of the lack of a theory. Often coincident pulses or other unique coincident wave forms were found output simultaneously from shielded materials at different locations. It is well known that rhythms of plants don’t change whether they are growing on the earth’s surface or deep underground under a steady light. All the findings thus far again seem to indicate all pervading wave action.” 28
So when you and Buzz start connecting, when the semiotics start pumping, you are saying that ZPE begins to amp up the interface. The O-R-I between man and animal has legendary restorative powers; you could say the liberation of ZPE creates a neg-entropic effect of some kind. It suspends inertia for a limited duration.
In your loving exchange with Buzz the semiotics dance into every creative form possible; they enable the exchange to remain alive and moving forward. We probably don’t grasp what a big deal it must be to a dog to be communicating with a human in such an intimate way. That interaction, emotional, overwhelming, irrational, is the nexus point bringing together art, free energy, semiotics and love. Whew! I think we have it! All that sophisticated stuff gets freely given to us, and what happens next: we turn into a race of slugs and parasites. Go figure.
Next: We are born into this extraordinary piece of psycho-physical-semiotic-spiritual machinery to tool around in all day. Then someone hands us a little white pill…and another whole world shows up around us. Suddenly, a complete change of scenery appears from nowhere, replete with denizens. My question, what can that little pill, with its little molecules contain that can cause such a radical shift in awareness?
JOHN NORSEEN
Quoting Duncan: “I found that W-waves appear to permit communication between plants and that W-waves seem to control plant spacing.” Could the wave characteristics Wagner attributes to this phenomenon have anything to do with Alfven Waves in the sense you use it?”
But of course, yes. And once more it seems that we can see that semiotics is a precursor to more formal languages, that semiotics and the Alfven waves (the magnetic patterns) play this role from non-living into living systems. Again the Alfven Waves are the magnetic shapes that reflect the mathematics, the Phi. The magnetic properties, to include the electromagnetic waves, and the magnetite in the cell structures, become the “play dough” for the mathematical signs and symbols...again the NS. So the mathematical concepts and constructs can be converted into actual non-living-pre-living and living- and post-living systems.
Quoting Duncan: “My question is, what can that little pill, with its little molecules, contain that can cause such a radical shift in awareness?”
OH BOY! Now you have gone and done it. This actually gets into the DEEPEST, DARKEST SECRETS of my work; the Columbine Massacre….wet ops in England…..the next, absolute WMD (information control is the ultimate weapon of mass destruction)...if you say that a chemical weapon is a WMD and use the hits in the Tokyo subway system (using chemical means)...and you take all of those vectors...% of people killed, injured, hospitalized, young vs. old; total numbers; duration of effects, total cost to bottom line, etc., then you must by logic state that the POKEMON incident in Japan was an order of magnitude greater in its effects...(the incident being a 20 second slice of a modified cartoon surreptitiously placed onto a powerful TV carrier channel, which produced more DAMAGE than a terror team releasing Chemical Weapons in the subway system).
Information Injection - Weapon of Mass Destruction
And now you get me going into the kinds of Little White Pills that are being made in Porten Downs and in the Russian labs and other places I am familiar with...and you are coming up with MK-809 in Germany and a special little breed I am working on that heads directly for each of the 5 main pain receptor sites in the Central Nervous System...alpha, epsilon, delta, kappa, and mu.
The super nicotine of all BRAIN FREQUENCIES...Duncan, is the NITROGEN in the air that we breathe… that gets into the blood… that interacts with the brain structures to begin the WARP UP TO RESONATING BRAIN FREQUENCIES....that is why the rapid introduction of nicotine, the Nitrogen...in NO, nitrous oxide, in cigarettes, in Pain Relieving, in various hallucinogens, etc…dominates our subception and perception.
You can easily think of the brain as simply a NITROGEN MOLECULE RESONATOR, and this is the currency by which the ZPE comes pumping in to humans. It is also how the anti-depressants and the REBOUND drugs work, in the Larium, and the Luvox, etc. etc. It is how the DOOM web sites get the SIGNAL into the receptive minds of the ATTACHED, and dispatches them...with the ultimate act already PRIMED and LOCKED and LOADED into the Superior Colliculus...and when the final signal arrives, the SC takes over and Wham…suicide, or info induced wet ops.
OK, OK...where did this all come from...The Brits and their work with the opium trade wars...and also the fear of drug-induced attacks on the Royal Marines that the big bore and higher caliber ammunition couldn't stop…what is the cause?...the Brits still classify all the work in THIQ...now it happens that THIQ is even more powerful than MK-809 and along the lines of my Designer register.
When a drunk becomes a Stage 4 alcoholic, the body and the brain actually convert body chemicals into THIQ...tetrahydroquinine, etc. and the THIQ can actually be found as little white crystals and powderize crystals in the brains of dead alcoholics. The BRITS began over 100 years ago to administer this to see the effects and they found it was 1000x more powerful than morphine (it is even more powerful than fentnyl, the gas used by the Russian 'vimple' antiterror squad to squash the Chechnyan take over of NordEst in Moscow…(the Brits gave the fentyl to the Russkies) and it knocked everybody out in less than 10 seconds...well, THIQ is 100x or more powerful than that...it is what the alcoholic produces to keep him, or rather, his Brain, alive.
Don't you see? We are our BRAINS...our brains consume 25% or more of the calories we eat…the Brain is 60% fat; it will be the last organ working when the famines hit. The BRAIN doesn't care about the rest of the body when shock comes, the blood pools into the brain. The BRAIN only cares about itself. It creates a world to engage in when the body can't make it happy. The BRAIN convinces people to stimulate it even if it kills the body. The BRAIN is a super Parasite. It wants us to feed it and take care of it, and it will do anything to stay alive!!!!! …except for the signals in the Superior Colliculus...if the signals in the SC get to a critical set point, then suicide takes over...VERY ODD that this powerful brain has such an absolute ON/OFF SWITCH…but it does.
So in the brain...you have 99% driving for WILD LIFE...and 1% set up to BLANK OUT. And in between are the LITTLE WHITE POWDERS - the PILLS, the 7% laudanum solutions.
Information as a Drug Delivery Device
DUNCAN, the cigarette industry knows all about this and the role of nicotine in pumping up the brain. It is in their “internal documents” going back to the 1930's and 40's...put more nicotine in…more sales, because the BRAINS demand it of their host bodies.
And back to THIQ...for a while the British medical corps was using the THIQ for battlefield ops and the patients were getting up and going back into battle with no arms and legs and such and they realized…this stuff is beyond TOP SECRET. What if the enemy gets this...our .45 to the head won't stop them from coming over the walls...so the Brits SEALED IT DEEP AWAY and got the US to “fogitdabowdit”. Until certain agency souls started to play with it again and it slipped out…hence the race to Oxycontin… pure female birthing neurotransmitter Oxytocin...I like the spelling changes myself...to MK-809, to new Fentnyl, to my new Designer Formula...
When I was in a certain lab structure in Russia I saw a similar formula being worked up to the 1,000th resonant bridge of the molecule, and the Swiss pharmaceutical dudes were smiling a catbird smile.
DUNCAN, if THIQ and the world is driven round and round by Brains hooked on nitrogen resonance, can you imagine what happens in BRAINS when you find SEMIOTIC FORMS resonating on different molecules....non-nitrogen based brains....just as all life is not Carbon based...what makes us think that all little white powders and pills need to resonate and ZPE lock a Nitrogen Based Brain??????
HA, HA...the laughter of a million brains on post THIQ liberty!!!!!
Norseen sends...talk about the next generation hedonist...YIKES!
---------------------
Duncan...This page shows the chemical “resonating” structure of quinolines...the basic block that links into the neuronal synapses, the neuropil, of the brain and when locked in, the ZPE comes pouring in…and you are the signal...pain goes away and is replaced by the Semiotic. Do you see the BIG FAT “N”? That is the nitrogen resonance....by playing around with the N...you can create all kinds of signals.(i.e. realities) in the brain...That is what your little white pill does...why it is so powerful...it plays the HAARP of the N - and transports you to wonderful new worlds....Maybe the N in Netscape Navigator is much like the white arrow in FedEx… ha, ha, ha…
To understand how a super-solid could exist, you have to imagine the realm of quantum mechanics, the modern theory that explains many of the properties of matter. In this realm there are different rules for the two categories of particles: fermions and bosons. Fermions include particles like electrons and atoms with an odd mass number, like helium-3. Bosons include atoms with an even mass number, like helium-4. The quantum-mechanical rule for fermions is that they cannot share a quantum state with other particles of their kind, but for bosons there is no limit to the number that can be in the identical quantum state. This talent that bosons have for Rockettes-style coordination leads to the remarkable properties that Chan and Kim discovered in super cooled helium-4.
“When we go to a low-enough temperature, thermal energy is no longer important and this quantum-mechanical effect becomes very apparent,” Chan explains. “In a super solid of helium-4, its identical helium-4 atoms are flowing around without any friction, rapidly changing places — but, because all its particles are in the identical quantum state, it remains a solid even though its component particles are continually flowing.”
DUNCAN...I see the NS as doing very much the same thing with regard to ZPE to further extend discussion to your very germane questions. When the O-I-R forms, it forms around a Semiotic...this S=O, I, R structure is conceptually like a Boson...and when it occurs, the ZPE just comes rushing in with no friction. Art is the act of arranging, rearranging, mixing semiotics to generate ZPE on purpose to cause/effect. Science is the testing and repeatability of making Semiotics generate ZPE. So indeed, Art and Science share many common properties in NS. Imagine ART with no friction in the mind of the beholder; it would open up any of an infinite number of ZPE channels. Science would attempt to predict, test and reaffirm which ZPE channels would open up.
--------------------------
Yes to your last paragraph, and voila, you have the Crop Circles...someone/thing somewhere is sending out Semiotic PULSES using the Alfven waves and it ends up in expressing the PHI and other mathematical symbols...like laser beams projecting a sign on a billboard. And for those receptive souls among us that have stood in the crop circle fields...they can feel their sex organs tingling and their heart jumping and their minds racing with thoughts...the ZPE channels residue, the life force behind the expression of the semiotics in the corn fields and soy and wheat, etc.
Remember the cold fusion work I sent you on new forms of matter…the super-solids and Bose-Einstein condensates...at the very, very low temperatures, such as in deep, deep space…all of the possible quantum states of the particle and the waves just kind of loose entropy and collapse in on one another until the basic pattern or the fundamental NS is just laying there, with all of these super particles and frozen waves, completely frictionless, intermingling and sliding into positions on top off, next too, under each other just waiting for some HEAT, some extra energy to start Slip Sliding away to become the many inter-tangled versions of life that they can be…each with a part of each other as a tether across the vast ZPE universes. So what did you have...an embryo that had just started to express its NS and it gets frozen and it collapses down into its fundamental NS....and all it takes is sufficient heat, or light, or sound...a combination of the four basic quanta of the universe…EM, photons, phonons, and bio-force (NS)...when these can kick around and sustain a Quantum Existence, both wave and particle...then the embryo springs back to life, expressing the various NS in vibrant Quantum Life.
YES...and it is the resonance of the Nitrogen Molecules in the Central Nervous System that is the key to the embryo coming to life...just as it is the nitrogen components and the nitrogen nodes of the crop circles that is converting the ZPE and the Alfven Magnetic patterns of PHI et al. In fact, I bet you that NASA and other agencies are classifying life potential planets by the returns we have been getting from Nitrogen Resonance experiments. See if NASA would even admit to this one.
DUNCAN LAURIE
So, whether one ingests a pain drug, a hallucinogen, or marijuana – the immediate lift, the spinning out of self, from pain, from normal consciousness, how is that an experience of ZPE? If it is, that puts ZPE on a very intimate plane of knowledge for many people, something not at all abstract. This is important; I am trying to tie these concepts into everyday events.
This innocuous little paragraph that appears almost like a footnote to your other email goes: “…pain goes away and is replaced by the Semiotic.” Here is what this statement means to me. The lift has taken us out of our normal biological frame of reference somewhat, and now we become aware that we are floating in a sea of impressions that more or less are tethered to our self-awareness, but they are still impressions that cause us to leave on little journeys in our mind. Depending on the potency of the drug, and probably the area of the brain it affects, the semiotics can be suggestive, compelling, or even capable of eclipsing both the external world itself and the cognitive assumptions of the individual “self” given enough power. Is that it?
Do the various fire-walls that we create between our core Interpretant and the variety of Representamen and Objects that receive our attention collapse under the impact of enough ZPE hitting those areas of the brain? In your analogy, perhaps the “I” at the surface of the brain which is really an “R” reverts back to the “I” that is deep within the brain. When that occurs, in a waking context, the collapse of the projection of external reality comes as quite a shock, but it is nothing compared to the shredding of cognitive components of the personality. These components are, I presume, basically various types of “armor” in the Reichian sense; programs we run based upon the repressed emotions in our formative learning experiences, past life karma, whatever.
JOHN NORSEEN
ZPE is very, very important — The result of communication in the Universe is increased complexity and decreased entropy, which is a fundamental flow in the universe, and the NS, because of its O>R>I structure, allows ZPE to resonate and to set up kindred oscillations and harmonics (radionics!!) using the very expansive and ubiquitous (dark) energy of the universe.
NS is the resonant structure that allows the dark energy of the universe, the ZPE, to actually enter into oscillations that have motive content – hence natural communication structures. With the NS, and via the NS energized by ZPE, the Universe can begin to shape itself...shape itself into non-living, pre-living and a host of living activities.
I am excited to even think that NS is a way to allow us to consider how the Universe, using only its own internal energy/mass, can become all of the complex things that it is and will be...and the arrow of the NS is to allow the universe to communicate, to resonate, to radionic this complexity to various life forms in transition from non-living to living to post living transformations of universal energy, of which the dark energy of ZPE is of sufficient source that the universe can indeed move forward into the future.
Move forward into the future, with NS as the communication of ever more complex structures to interpret and prepare and influence the future to some point where the future will fold in upon itself and once again regenerate itself from nothing.
Importantly, the Alfven Wave set up the magnetic grid lines in the NS in the brain/earth resonance waveguide that allows the human brain to know it is of this earth.
This has implications as man departs Earth based systems. Man will need to maintain some form of acceptable artificial magnetic grid pattern, or to modify the brain to accept a new Non-Earth directional system.
DUNCAN LAURIE
Go back a minute to the artistic discussion of the impact of semiotics on the brain, to what you have called “transformations of universal energy, of which the dark energy of ZPE is of sufficient source.” What do you think of these two examples in the immediate experience domain? I had a show in New York in 1987, just at the time of the market crash. I had 50 glass paintings made from the time that I spent in Latin America. They were placed sequentially, like a journey the visitor went on as they walked around the room. A woman walked in (I wasn't there) and began strolling by the paintings? She was dressed as a person in mourning. When she got to a picture I had made of a masked Mardi Gras figure in Venezuela approaching my car, she gasped. Later, she claimed to have experienced what she called “a healing experience” upon seeing the picture.
FIGURE 44: DUNCAN LAURIE. “MARDI GRAS IN VENEZUELA”. PAINT AND GOLD LEAF ON CARVED GLASS
FIGURE 44: DUNCAN LAURIE. “MARDI GRAS IN VENEZUELA”. PAINT AND GOLD LEAF ON CARVED GLASS
There was another person in the gallery, who happened to be a professional photographer, but was unconnected to the lady having the experience. The photographer observed that the lady in question seemed to project light around her at that precise moment she encountered the painting. Later she explained that she had been grieving the death of her husband. When she first saw the painting, she became identified with the profile of the woman driving the car in the picture; she also perceived the masked figure at the window as Death. Later, she explained that some shift in consciousness she experienced at that moment freed her from her grieving and allowed her to resume living normally again.
FIGURE 45: LAURIE STUDIO
FIGURE 45: LAURIE STUDIO
She bought the painting; it was the only one I sold. Nor did I ever meet her, to my regret. To me, this is an example of the ZPE finding a route into her life through the semiotics in the art to effect an energetic transformation. Perhaps this is how it works in the native context, like Navajo sand painting; I don’t know. But I know that image did more for her than look pretty on her wall.
Next, consider my studio, all the elements that make it the experience it is... the wild point of land full of aesthetic beauty, the proportions of the building, etc., they all add up, say, to enhanced ZPE. Maybe beauty is actually a Representamen of ZPE? Beauty is accumulated at the studio, in the iron girders, the electronics, in the Interpretant.
JOHN NORSEEN
Duncan, the Revelation is upon ye...the Epiphany!! Aye Carumba Man…you have got it! Here is what opened the Aldous Huxley DOORS -- remember when you and I get all excited when we begin to discuss an idea, and then that idea links us into a wild world… and whether it is I speaking or you taking a turn at describing something...we are both on the same semiotic wavelength! The energy is flowing, the hair on our necks is twinging, and we are both hypnotized, mesmerized, energized…and suddenly a phone connection becomes a Semiotic Panorama that even lingers on and inherits our dreams and influences all the things that we do for the next few hours….it locks into a common holy ground of memories that become a dossier of the NORSEEN-LAURIE hunt to describe…EXACTLY what I just described.
Here is what did it for me...from my perspective…I locked onto the “…wild point of land with the aesthetic beauty and the proportions of the building, etc. all add up to ZPE.”
That is it Duncan…increased ZPE!!!!! People, ideas, events, all flock to increased zones of energy. Wouldn't you, after miles and miles and days in the flat desert with no rolling hills, you come across a raging flow of water, fire, insects...energy: and it will captivate you...can you say, Niagara Falls? — man o man, that is ZPE ….and Semiotic hyperbole. But go back…the aesthetic flow of the point of land...the very juxtaposition alone is enough to generate the ZPE; spit of land on rough water, lapping at the zero point of three axis motion...the land versus the sea versus the sky....0,0,0, on the x, y, a ZERO point axis. Any movement of the water or sky, clouds against the land, will trigger the levels of ZPE to fluctuate, to rise and fall...and that creates the Rhythm...the frequency, the amplitude and the phase to become the metrics for the Semiotic experience...you are looking at your land from your VECTOR and I am remembering the land now from my memory, and the memory of the night I stayed and listened to the energy lapping and zapping at my brain from inside a warm cocoon, the bed in the guest house right on the nexus of the ZPE axis...and we Vector each other to our own viewing point...sometimes even to the extent where you say, NO, NO. Come over here, look right there…now, now do you see IT?... You get me to actually line up with your vector view of the Semiotic, and even more to feel the ZPE flowing into your brain...now my brain too...And the more we see the same semiotic...we don't have to line up...we can split and separate and take a journey viewing the Semiotic from a different phase angle, but we still both see the semiotic inside our own Brain-Universe.
And the structure of the studio...yes, structure is vital to semiotics, to receiving and transmitting functions…your structure serves as another ZPE locking point to capture the 360 degree vista, the entire sphere of perception of the semiotic, and to resonate in the ZPE.
Remember, Semiotics is the instantaneous flow of ZPE from one idea to another...Semiotics unlocks the free flow of ZPE and channels it into a more powerful stream of energy, dimensions dictated by the power and the structure of the semiotic or semiotics in the scene.
FIGURE 46: NAVAJO SAND PAINTING
FIGURE 46: NAVAJO SAND PAINTING
Just as civilizations and WAR BATTLES make their location known due to the Ortgeist and the Zeitgeist of the landform or water current or skyscape, Semiotics do exactly the same...People say when they go to Gettysburg…oh yes, I can feel it now…now I know why the battle was fought here in July, heat of 100+ degrees, in this sleepy little town of worshippers where the bodies would lie bloated and flies would feast, and then a humble tall man with a beard would continue to honor it, at least with a small speech…Semiotic upon semiotic, tying the centuries of death and belief together, the last full measure of devotion...to what GETTYSBURG is; a major SEMIOTIC of the glory and insanity of WAR…the ZPE drew two great armies together in the middle of a war of the nation and continues to semiotically hold them there in death and honor, and will forever charge a person's soul; if only to read the REPRESENTAMEN of that semiotic clash, the Gettysburg Address....for in that address, the entire “battlerama” churns on, forever crossing the cornfields, falling over crossed fences, blood running down and splashing sounds and gurgling sounds in the devil’s den.
Do you see what you have discovered, Duncan??!!!! There is another ARCHITECTURE, another SCULPTURE, ART, SCIENCE; of HISTORY, of the basic human component of wonderful MEMORY....and that is Semiotics, and semiotics is powered by ZPE...because in the universe, a basic component of life is the structure of the Object which exists in reality or in concept, which can identity itself through a INTERPRETER, either self contained; can be looked up...or adheres from a source outside of the object itself, and is capable of making copies or various kinds of REPRESENTAMEN of itself for viewing from different perspectives...and when an Object forms, much like a planetary system, containing an Interpreter which produces a unique identity of the Object, marking it forever as special in the universe of things and ideas, the very system turns into a vast QUANTUM n-dimensional XEROX copier capable of producing manifest REPRESENTAMEN of itself in myriad form and phase and angle and shade of color and light and dark…….then this Thing, this Object of Mind, invested with Interpretation and Representation of Identity, is from that point on a Sign & Symbol = which equals a SEMIOTIC. And this Semiotic structure of O< I
For it is the string vibrations of the magnetic components of the universe, the Alfven waves, the gravity waves, the magnetic fluxes, the electromagnetic forces of the atom, and the Van der Waals...that mandates that this Object must stay together long enough to produce a semiotic before it collapses into the manifest black WHOLE. Because, Duncan, IT is NOT the stars we see in the SKY and the Heavens beyond the sky, the province of the Gods that pushed all this energy and ZPE and Alfven and semiotics and radions our way, but the ORIGIN of SEMIOTICS, the sculptural architecture of LIFE! LIFE beckons out to LIFE...semiotics is the way to produce Identity, and ZPE is what provides the power to emanate, and Alfven waves provide the instantaneous, universe complete, GRID upon which LIFE can tap, tap, tap out a signal, and RADIONICS is the resonate harmonics, the special tuning frequencies by which a Semiotic can repeat itself in perfect form....and radionics can, in the purity of eidetic mathematics, send out the representative shape of the semiotic, as if it were the Object Identity itself. And Semiotics can do more than transmit using the ZPE of the unempty vacuum of space and time and IDENTITY…Semiotics can Listen, and when Semiotic structures begin to vibrate with the ZPE radionics of another tantalizing hum from another LIFE or non-life structure...then that Semiotic Identity, using the Alfven Magnetic Wave GRID...begins to contact the other semiotic, humming and forming a communication (aesthetic, art, science, radio transmitter, quantum pulse generator, Norseen Semiotic transfer) relationship and linkage into that other semiotic.
The greater the ZPE flow the greater the linkage and the local-global growth of the Identity to Identity relationship. Duncan, where there is energy, there is semiotics, where there is semiotics and energy…there is life...where there is life, there is attempts to communicate...where there are attempts to communicate, RADIONICS can facilitate the resonate streaming of Semiotic into Semiotic. Just look at where Humans congregate, where they can communicate ideas or objective measures of life… along a river, the energy along the seacoast, the energy at the top of mountains, the energy deep at sea…where they attempt to communicate…..
So Duncan – you have touched the Semiotic Source in your missive to me about the wild point of land at the junction the sea/sky, with a strange vibrating STUDIO, replete with RADIONICS tuning, sampling the Spectra-Quantum —AND STRENGTHENING THE RELATIONSHIP, the COMMUNICATION of IDENTITIES IN SEARCH OF OUTWARD REACHING SOULS — a special semiotic community of spirits and signals across the vivid abyss.
You have broken the sacred code, Duncan...be prepared for the onrush of vaulted “WELCOMERS”!
28 Wagner, O. Ed, Waves in Dark Matter, Wagner Research Laboratory, 1995.
---
12 SEMIOTIC PRESSURES
DUNCAN LAURIE
I’d like to share a story from our household that looks at semiotics in a more intimate light. We had a Belgian Shepherd named Olaf my wife purchased some years ago when we were first married. Olaf had a penchant for attacking older women and small animals. As he got older, the penchant got worse. Finally Olaf murdered one of our goats after a long and violent career targeting animate and inanimate objects and we had to put him down. Immediately, Kim found another dog of the same breed, which we still have. Emma was much calmer and gentler. Last weekend, I brought Emma to the beach for a run. There was nobody there, and she was running and having fun. Bear in mind that this has been going on all summer, even on busy days, without incident. Then an older woman arrived carrying a small Terrier. As Emma approached, she put her small dog down to play. Much to her horror, Emma grabbed her dog in her mouth and shook her violently in the air, fortunately with only minor resulting damage.
Going back to when Olaf was alive, Kim occasionally took a small pleasure in some of the cruel antics he performed. However, as Olaf's behavior became more and more deranged, Kim was faced with examining why she felt this way. Slowly, a certain threshold was being reached beyond which the awareness of the dog’s sadistic impulses could not be tolerated, ignored or rationalized by the normally kind-hearted Kim.
When the experience occurred, I began to have the feeling that some overriding semiotic was influencing both the dogs and Kim alike. Was Kim selecting dogs that allowed her to externalize and study an uncomfortable part of her psychology? Was there an unconscious intent being generated by a semiotic lodged in Kim's psyche? Was this semiotic somehow selecting a specific breed to demonstrate its compulsive power?
In the case of Emma, she did not for the longest time show any violence towards humans or domestic animals. Then, a few months ago, she tore the eye out of our Dachshund in an apparent food fight, directly in front of Bryn (our 5 year old). Did this mean the pressure from the semiotic was ripening, or the threshold to restraining it was being eroded? I felt as though I was witnessing the very processes we have been discussing unfolding in a deliberate manner for my inspection.
After the incident on the beach I broached the possibility that both dogs somehow seemed to reflect a certain sub-surface rage in her. Normally, this rage is quiescent, eclipsed and subsumed by moderate and gentle behavior. However, it does boil over at certain times, occasionally in a very irrational way. It seems as though various hurts and indignities of an earlier time in her life were buried in a part of her psyche that maintained only a tenuous connection to her conscious mind. When I mentioned the parallel behavior of the dogs to her occasional social hostility, she was flabbergasted; it was like she had never considered the connection. Perhaps repressed material of an uncomfortable emotional nature in time becomes an autonomous semiotic floating around in the psyche.
What is not so easy to comprehend is the psychic power of the semiotic to operate with autonomy in the context of a person or a group, in our case impacting dogs, husbands, children, friends, etc. One wonders if ancient and primitive peoples saw these occurrences and set about devising radionic and artistic strategies to bleed energy from these semiotic structures, which were given mythological characterizations. Western culture knows this process best through Classical Greek Theater, via the catharsis, providing emotional ventilation of the ubiquitous Oedipus complex.
The question for me as an artistic advocate for radionic technology is how to best develop and understand this modern, scientific discipline of semiotics in the pursuit of an energetically based art? When it comes to using radionic theory, for instance, the impediment is the technology itself. It has been reduced to absurdity by the very scientific mindset that, in your narratives, now employs it via semiotics. Still, we are assigning more to the radionics box than its function as a mere instrument. Semiotically speaking, it is the repository of the Representamen and the pivotal juncture where intent crosses the information barrier and becomes functional and energetic, adding value to life.
By stark contrast, the semiotic influencing Kim and the dogs couldn't care less whether it received conscious interpretation by them. It just powered on through their psyches, with or without their consent, forcing its own brand of interpretation on the hapless victims.
When it comes to art, I find a similar situation. Whatever shamanic understanding of semiotics exists in art has been superseded by another metric, business. For market makers, anyone is a target. When marketers connect their intent to us through the proper semiotic handshake, the energy downloads and off we run to the malls and theaters. This "art" is merely a facilitator for a market driven cultural hegemony. This is what I find so depressing. One would hope radionic/semiotic technology could eventually create a counterforce to this situation, and not just make it worse.
You describe the semiotic water going down the pipeline, right through the molecular to the sub-atomic level; information and intent seeking a return on its investment of energy in value-added survival potential. What I want to see is what goes back up the pipeline? By that, I mean are we examining all these things in only one context; survival and propagation? What I believe art originally facilitated was the absorption of lower semiotic structures into higher structures, to the point consciousness became a technology for constructing reality.
Some artists vividly experience this sacred component; it is what separates us from brutal nature. To me, the only reason to combine radionics with semiotics with design is to further an art that liberates the psyche from determinism and materialism.
It is one thing to understand and use a technology, another to find ourselves controlled by it. If the military really had a technology that could control behavior, they could better liberate us from self-destructive habits and we wouldn't need to wage war. We wouldn't waste our military force at all. We could be exporting semiotic/radionic transceivers disguised as a works of art that broadcast forgiveness.
Maybe they would operate something like a cloudbuster; the semiotic art piece would couple to the ZPF, sucking out distorted semiotics and replacing them with the creative fervor of the life energy. We could test it out on the White House. It is the ultimate non-lethal weapon.
So, what end does the intelligence community serves, business, political, or extraterrestrial? Whatever it is, they don’t want these kinds of tools for good. Whatever purpose it serves, the context is Darwinian; at least that is my impression.
JOHN NORSEEN
This is great. I was compelled by thoughts raging all night long to tell you about the "pressures" that can build up in semiotic creatures..."pressures" indeed greater than mere physical forces, even magmatic-plate tectonics etc. folding and bending and twisting and even changing the biochemistry of the rocks...think about it. There are pressures built up in the brain due to semiotic convulsions that rival and can exceed the greatest of earth-world forces. It can make a person launch a thousand nuclear bombs, or walk into a Gaza Strip cafe and blow up everyone.
Anyways, I was working with the Russian Academy of Science Group in Reflexive Control and we were developing an N-Dimensional Graph, called Krylov Space after the Russian bio-mathematician, Krylov, and we developed this cursory folding map of how the brain can twist and turn Semiotics into Biological Pressures, and in certain regions of the Map, the person would as one would expect under harsh and continuing intense pressures...be pushed and molded into some perverse forms of behavior. In other areas of the Krylov Map, where things were going good the Map was like a quiet estuary or shallow sea…very mellow. So, going back to my mental models of the extreme vortex that Krylov Space can extend - I was prompted to talk about the following...and then I get this email from you and you are hitting all around what it is that I want to get into.
FIGURE 47: ORGONOMIC CLOUDBUSTER, THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ORGONOMY, PRINCETON, NJ
FIGURE 47: ORGONOMIC CLOUDBUSTER, THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ORGONOMY, PRINCETON, NJ
Do we have just one REPRESENTAMEN of ourselves, just one copy that we attend to for reality checks...do we have a master copy that we use to Heal ourselves, or to project via ZPE to others as an initial communications link...like how a plant sends out a rhizome to test for fertile connections and whether more formal plant structures make sense to follow...
Well, the answer in Brain Terms is NO! Where as the DNA shows a perfect copy to the rest of the world...the BRAIN, by virtue of its very structural development, sends out a Semiotic REPRESENTAMEN that is very biased to the number of Sensory Bundles that it possesses to test the world. Whereas a copy of the DNA will tell a cell exactly at what point to become what kind of precise agent of life, the BRAIN tells a more IMMEDIATE, Survival Beckoned, Story or Copy of our Identity. This other REALITY, this other REPRESENTAMEN, this other Identity, is the HOMUNCULUS.
And it is the Identity of the HOMUNCULUS that orients how we, on a Krylov Basis, engage in interactions, semiotic communications, with others. And our self-identity is the number of neurons attached to sensory and perceptual controls and filters that defines how we SEMIOTICALLY see ourselves.
And Duncan, this HOMUNCULUS view of ourselves is quite distinct and erroneous from how we Publicly Announce the HAND-EYE mirror reflection of ourselves...for the Hand-Eye Identity, or the mirror kind of reflection of who we are, is very unlike the HOMUNCULUS or sensor perception ratio view of ourselves…very big lips, huge hands, tiny ribs, etc. And both the Hand-Eye, HOMUNCULUS, and also the DNA ultimate cell expression of ourselves for healing purposes are all so very different that if we try to impose any one Identity upon ourselves we will suffer from hopeless inextricability from such intertwined REPRESENTAMEN. Now add to this the untold number of other people telling us that we are a little bit of this and a little bit of that and it becomes obvious that a Biological System, containing these various different identities, is bound to be in a complex adaptive process of figuring itself out and unwinding itself…only to more completely BOLLIX up the entire concept, getting ever more entwined in itself, and ever more uncertain of what is the TRUE IDENTITY...
So when one says Seek the Truth...what Truth should we seek?
If we seek DNA truth, then we see how the cells will ultimately accord themselves to create a unique individual within a unique species.
FIGURE 48: SEMIOTIC MIRROR FOCUS
FIGURE 48: SEMIOTIC MIRROR FOCUS
If we seek HOMUNCULUS truth, then we find a biological object that responds to life based upon the number of senses, sensory patches and perceptual prongs that can be accommodated.
If we seek Hand-Eye truth, then we find ourselves comfortable in things that we can manipulate and control based on a very limited set of mirror reflections and biophysical instrumentations.
If we seek interpersonal truth, then we find ourselves trying to manipulate all of ourselves to become the model that others express upon ourselves...the truth of identity imposed on ourselves is truth.
But if we seek SEMIOTIC Truth, we find that each identity is indeed separate from any other, not only by structural components, but in the EASE by which the identity seeks out other unique identities.
Based on SEMIOTIC truth, we may actually be composed of Multiple Separate and Simultaneous truths...we can indeed navigate amongst our own multiple semiotic truths and we flow toward some common point...
This common point is TRUTH, where all each specific identities can occupy a status, aware of each other and sufficient in the self-knowledge of the differences.
Duncan, as you so passionately describe how you would go through agony in sculpture, and then you would pass into this ZPE ZONE where the Sculpture revealed itself to you. And this Bond, this bond of the truth, and your willingness to escape yourself from any one Semiotic Truth, resulted in you becoming aware of yourself, and the Sculpture. At this point, the ZPE was an open flow between yourself and the Sculpture. You were in a KRYLOV SPACE, a matrix dimensional grid of ONE IDENTITY communicating, sharing complete semiotics, with another IDENTITY… the identity, the true Representamen of the piece of ART as it could only possibly exist as at last the final true form from which it was up ‘til now encased in the hubris of covered identity.
Duncan…think about what happened in your BRAIN when you finally became aware of the FORM in the block of wood, or whatever material you were working with. When you semiotically found the form you engaged on a period of truth...and this Truth was absolutely invigorating...you became infused with energy and enthusiasm and excitation...your KRYLOV SPACE began to RESONATE with SEMIOTIC ZPE.. Further, when you produced your work of ART and showed it others…the energy and the zone contained sufficient ZPE energy to entrain others to share in your TRUTH.
Because TRUTH converts others into TRUTH. TRUTH is at the FORMATIC basis of the universe; all things are converted into each other’s identity. Each is as of the other, and all things are one, yet they are themselves.
Now we get into my experiments, and the experiments of others, to measure this TRUTH of KRYLOV SPACE at the wavefront between LIFE and DEATH, which biologic creatures experience, but not non-biologic creatures. Up to some point, one can identify and measure the destruction of IDENTITY of a biologic versus a non-biologic. Intuitively, if you could turn on a KRYLOV radar screen of sorts and blew up a Rock, the truth and the disruptions of Rock Semiotics would necessarily be of a different class than taking a Living System, such as a tree or a Whale, and blowing them up.
At the moment of explosion, the SEMIOTIC identity of the OBJECT would be destroyed. But just as different items leave a different explosive trace, would we be able to differentiate the explosive death patterns of Semiotic Truth…The answer is YES.
If one truly allows the Hand-Eye Semiotics to subside, and the DEEP, DEEP DNA, deep sleep, Theta and Delta brain wave frequencies to dominate, we should clearly see that there is at some precise moment in space-time of one or many particular Quantum states...an instantaneous Disruption and Dispersion of TRUTH. We can measure the change in LIFE and IDENTITY, and if we are very exact in following the after signals, we can track and monitor the new pathways that the previous truth, now destroyed in its current form, is now embarked upon.
If we are very careful as we browse through our MIND, listening to hand-eye semiotics, and DNA semiotics, and TRUE SEMIOTICS powered by ZPE...we can now differentiate many, many different Identities and REALITIES and many, many forms of Truth...and become more in tune with how our KRYLOV SPACE is reaching out and interacting with other SEMIOTIC forms.
Is this thought that is in my head the OBJECT, or is it the INTERPRETATION of the object, or is it only one of many different forms of REPRESENTATION or copies of the object form…
Duncan, you are so aware of your surroundings and the internal forms of things that you naturally flow with the ZPE that drives the universe. ZPE is the natural fuel of semiotics. SEMIOTICS is the natural communications structure of the universe. And when a TRUTH interacts with a TRUTH, then a ZPE channel is formed into which all other forms of Semiotics and truth flow in and become jumbled up into rich, complex, chaotic life — from which TRUE ART, TRUE SCIENCE, TRUE SEMIOTICS, in essence TRUE FORM or TRUTH, will again come forth.
Across the universe, where such SEMIOTIC TRUTH POOLS are found undisturbed, or where they are encountered where fundamental processes are truncated or DisINTENDED, the INTENT is not to move beyond the current State of being. There must be MASSIVE, SIGNIFICANT, SEMIOTIC PRESSURE RIDGES and Resonating POINTS, like a volcano about to explode but the plug is just strong enough to cap the rival energies below...or it is like a Semiotic Battery, sending out repetitive after repetitive signals that there is a semiotic event that is being held barely in check by other universal forces, or biological or human or spiritual forces.
Tonight, as you fall asleep, specifically task your Krylov Semiotics to venture out from the body, out past the homunculus, and into and beyond the DNA vibrations. Fan out from the brain, but maintain MIND, and seek out a resonating SEMIOTIC battery, or a Semiotic Truth...and request that your alert, waking Alpha Brain State Krylov persona encounter this Alien Semiotic Find, and engage in the Interpretant of the object, and consider the various Representamen of this novel semiotic object...and bring back to your Krylov Space capacity, the Semiotic Truth of this newfound ZPE fed semiotic or turn on some distant semiotic battery and describe another LIFE POOL somewhere else in the universe…and that when you next awake, you will be aware of the nocturnal journey...and that during the next day, you will provide yourself evidence of your, Not archaeological, but rather SEMIOTIC dig.
Duncan, you naturally do this...but for the next few weeks, vigorously invite yourself to EXPLORE...explore Route 66. But be careful not to get on Route 666!"
DUNCAN LAURIE
Since we seem to have solved all the big questions, I’d like to expend some attention on the mundane. I've been burrowing down of late into semiotic layers deep beneath the human waveform, down where the ancient thought forms dwell… It seems to have something to do with the direction of our conversations of late…
For quite some time due to the illness and dementia of my mother, I have been extensively preoccupied with her affairs. In fact, it goes all the way back to my father's death a few years ago. Following that event, after many blissful years in New York, I found myself back in the family meat-grinder again.
The family karma is heavy with unresolved emotions. For a number of years after our father’s demise my brother and I didn't speak. Gradually things thawed out between us when we realized elements within the greater family were exploiting this situation at our expense. We got down to the business of sorting out some of these thorny problems. From my perspective, little family nightmares have been tarnishing joyful daily life for years. Perhaps you would see a trail of autonomous clinging semiotics passed down through generations, kept functional by virtue of bound emotional energy.
This situation became grueling of late, with the dividing up of our family effects. These effects were significant; houses full of all kinds of stuff; beautiful stuff, valuable stuff; she never threw anything away.
In many ways one family member is very similar to our mother; he never throws anything away. He is masterful at using inertia to obtain his desired end. This ability has made getting through the many details of our duties excruciatingly painful at times. Overwhelmingly, my strongest impulse has been to explode; just trash everything and run for the hills. That has not been an option under the circumstances, however. What remains is a long, slow, torturous addendum to real life; the care and feeding of petulant semiotics (and a bad case of hives).
Anyway, about two or three weeks back we were stymied in the middle of dividing up some of our mother's possessions. They had been taken to my studio following her recent move to a nursing home. The stuff was scattered all over the studio and in my way, lying there for weeks as the inertia thing played itself out. Time went on; we gradually divided up a few things, but the remainder still took up a lot of space, and I was getting crazy.
Then, about three or four days later I sat down one evening to meditate on it all. It didn't go well, I felt even more uncomfortable. I finally decided to just lie down. Slowly a burning pain began to spread throughout my legs and hip. Thinking it would go away, I just waited, but finally I took some arthritis medication. The next thing I knew, I am in a dream, a very lucid dream. I was quite fully conscious of my self and my surroundings.
The dream began with me picking up a much loved, but now deceased deeply exasperating anima figure at a very homey looking suburban house, like the one I grew up in. She came running out to my car just as though we were right in the middle of Grosse Pointe. In fact it was so normal and matter-of-fact that it didn't even really dawn on me that she was dead and I hadn't seen her in a long time. We went off and spent time together driving and talking and doing dream things. It was so mundane I couldn't remember any of it except this one part.
Somewhere in the middle of the dream I started to cough very hard. The next thing I knew a big wad of something was flung out of my throat and onto the floor. When I went over to see what it was, the dark mass uncurled into a very primitive life form. It was something like a trilobite, one of those things with a spiked, ridged exoskeleton, about the size of my hand, and very much alive! Later on, it happened again. This time I went over and picked it up and had a hard look at it. It felt very strange.
Back in the old here and now, when I woke up, I felt turbo-charged! Whatever I coughed up really stayed coughed up. I felt like an illness was purged, a metaphysical weight had lifted in the process.
I have to mention that not long before, as part of my lingering malaise, I had begun smoking cigars again. After a few months, my chest began to hurt. Then in early November a good friend of mine died of throat cancer, just as another became diagnosed with the same, while a third was in the hospital with a collapsed lung and a fourth was praying some new antibiotic would keep away pneumonia......did I mention the fifth hanging on by a thread waiting for a new liver? (When the liver did come along he couldn't take it due to, you guessed it, lung infection.) Later, they all died, save one. And didn’t I mention you? You are sick in the middle of all this as well, are you not???
Meanwhile, in spite of all of the family angst, we are having our semiotic discussion. I am thinking a lot about radionics in the abstract, but missing things going on right in my face. My studio, my primo radionics device, has been slowly accumulating my share of family semiotics. Many heirlooms have wound up there; also the family papers, books, memorabilia. They permeated my space. Then, with the latest load, it hit critical mass. Many of the objects were charged by an emotionally dark time in my life. I thought I had divested myself of them, but here they are crushing me again! Worse, around me I am seeing disease and illness everywhere!
Men are working on the studio building, like a counter-force. The leaks are being discovered and sealed; the floors are suddenly dry for the first time ever! The broken windows are being replaced; the old machinery and glass are dragged out to the sheds, the walls are painted; the upstairs is cleaned and tuned up; now the metaphorical picture is dawning on me! More heirlooms are divided and removed, but the issue is becoming clear. The objects and their meaning must be rendered harmless and neutralized; to do this they must be symbolically stripped of significance. Boxing them up and concealing them begins to do the trick.
This is what I have been doing. It sounds insane, but the studio itself has been sucking this family energy out of me and neutralizing these objects. The original pretext that initiated all the design improvements was installing a toilet; you know, one of those things to get rid of the shit?
So now the top two floors are clean and empty; and I ask myself; what is a radionic device really for? It is for facilitating catharsis. It is for tuning us in to the metaphorical reality within which we are imbedded; you could say firmly stuck. It liberates the impressions keeping us locked down; our past. Where is our past but in the objects (and images and music), the Representamen that bring us back to our past when we encounter them? What is the nature of that transaction, if not semiotic? Where in all our daily life does the force of a semiotic rise before us with more frightening and perilous autonomy than it does in the charged objects and people of our past?
These relationships define and control us; we kill for them and suffer for them and lie for them and cry for them; and it is only at death, when they are permanently lost, that we forgo their influence. These virtual semiotics can create such a compelling radionic force for good or bad, that they overpower the other fine historical attributes of heirlooms and precious goods. You call things like them “...the controlled smart weapons of conceptual warfare...”, but they have always been used against us by our cultures, our religions, our ancestors, our family....
JOHN NORSEEN
Yes, Yes, I am rattling the bars of the cage right now! I am taking a metal cup and banging it, skipping it hard across the bars of the mental cage, demanding to SEE MY LAWYER, to be freed from my FALSE IMPRISONMENT…and I too pick up a book with the imprint of the Trilobite, and read in the biblical chapters...And now I must put away childish things. When you put away the weight and 'heirlooms' of childhood, only then can you truly enjoy the role of the Adult. You are correct about the dead…they wish to linger on and invest themselves in our surroundings...if you let them tie you down and direct your life, they surely will...how many soldiers died in WWII because of the deaths of those at Pearl Harbor, and how many terrorists are Fadai because the foreign police state killed their relatives…brother against brother, father and mother against sons and daughters. Yes, Duncan, the spirits of the past enforce great strength upon our lives if we allow their Semiotics to superimpose themselves upon us. We can share our lives with our loved ones if we choose, but we must be careful in the power of their semiotics, the Representamen of their lives, to latch on to our every BREATH...cough it up…spit it out...Take in the Fresh Air anew...cleanse the lungs and the soul of the inertia of the past. Let the Studio tune you in to the next phase of your semiotic reality. Honor the past, learn from the past, turn to it for wisdom, but boldly strike out on new pathways, seek out new lives and new cultures, go where your senses have never dwelt.
My dad died when I was in flight school on a training mission, and then my mom died a few years later when I was at the Naval War College, and it took years for my family, three older sisters and me, to come to grips with the partitioning of the family accumulations...it was going nowhere and we were all upset with each other based on our own view of how we were treated as children and what should properly belong to us...much as you describe your situation. Then one day we realized this was futile and would go on forever without satisfactory end...So we all said we would Number the Items of Discussion...we would place the numbers into a box and shake up the box. Then we would roll dice to pick the order in which we would pick the numbers from the box. And if we picked a number corresponding to an item that we didn't care for, we could then barter with the others for items we did indeed want. Amazingly, we also prayed that the numbers we picked would be for those things we wanted, and for our Mom and Dad's spirit to guide the numbers selection -- and we all ended up with the items we wanted…the items we didn't agree upon were put up and sold and we split the proceeds. Basically, that is how we got through a tough emotional time.
Today, I am pleased with my share of my childhood belongings, such as a 1900 Victor Speaking Machine with original slate-back records of direct analogue of Enrico Caruso. Did you know that Helen KELLER used Enrico Caruso to help her identify and create her brail concept. I have a picture of her, with her hands feeling his face, chin and lips as he sings, and she is smiling because she can FEEL the SEMIOTICS of his voice creating his operatic sounds. When I play the music from 1900 on this machine for my children they get all excited knowing this is Semiotics captured from 100 years ago...it astounds them...they love it and bring in their friends to listen to MY Dad’s wacky old time record player, playing the voices of really neat dead people. I swear Duncan, it is a blast from the past to be hearing Caruso sing with all the background noise and scratching, and seeing the kids mesmerized by the sweeping sounds of the Victrola…a veritable 100 year overlap of Semiotics...it is wild, as if the Victrola is linking the centuries together into one seamless MEME.
Speaking of Trilobites...I can still vividly remember a LIFE EVENT one drizzly late October day in the mid-70s near State College, PA at a highway cut through a mountain pass. The Highway had conveniently cut through the side of an anticline mountain formation of deep sedimentary layers, much like your deep layers of memories, and had exposed the entire geologic column that we were studying at college in my major Earth and Mineral Sciences...So there I am on a Saturday morning at 0800 in the am, cold and damp with a geologic axe in my hand and I am digging at a site of Reedsdale Shale formation. I turn over a slate of sedimentary rock, reddish gray in color and as I split it open, THERE EXPOSED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN OVER 400 MILLION, REPEAT 400!! MILLION YEARS...WAS THE PERFECTLY PRESERVED INDENTATION OF A TRILOBITE. DUNCAN, IT WAS PRISTINE. AND I BEGAN TO CRY AND WHOOP AND HOLLER AND THE REST OF THE TEAM CAME OVER AND EXCLAIMED HOW COOL IT WAS AND THE PROFESSOR ASKED ME WHY I WAS CRYING…AND I EXPLAINED THAT, IMAGINE THIS, I AM THE FIRST PERSON IN OVER 400 MILLION YEARS TO SEE THIS…EVERYTHING LEAVES A TRACE AND EVERYTHING WILL BE REVEALED!
So I was intimately moved and found it of utmost interest that you would describe the object expelled from your lungs as the trilobite…this further compels me to understand that you and I are meant to be carrying out this inquiry into Semiotics and Radionics and ZPE, et al. Together, we are Revealing Objects, Interpretation and Representation of the Ages. We are burrowing along a grooved Alfven Wave to some most exotic Grid Coordinates — a powerful Semiotic Location. Hold on as best you can.
DUNCAN LAURIE
I am not at the end of my trilobite story. I have been fascinated with these things for a long time, too. I used to find them (and brachiopods) as a kid in Michigan. I also experienced the same awesome feeling about seeing these ancient living creatures now turned into stone.
My brother and I were at a point in dividing the family stuff where we came to this beautiful Japanese box of drawers filled with stones; arrowheads, mauls, meteorites and, of course, trilobites. Now my mother had collected lots and lots of rocks with us, but these were the very best. And you know I wanted that box badly. Instead, I let it go. I didn't connect everything at the time, because the dream came later, but that box of rocks was also at the core of the disgust and repulsion I felt around the whole issue of these attachments, brought into focus by the box of stones. Thinking about it, I realized the joy was in the hunt for them, the Object, and that I would keep. So, I gave them up in barter. By doing so, one part of that past was purged; quite literally it turned out.
Back to your experience; 400 million years lapse from when that trilobite was sucking up algae in the mud and the time you cracked him out of his eternal sleep. Think of all the creatures between then and now that have been sucked into mud and changed into stone or dirt! Imagine all that life force transiting those crystals; you have to start thinking that there is more to plain old rock than what we usually see.
As you know, I have been very taken by T. Townsend Brown's papers on the electrical self-potential of certain rocks, and the depths he went to isolate these rocks from outside influence, measuring their output even far below the surface of the earth. His measurements indicated that at times the rock signal was correlated to the galactic core and also were periodically eclipsed by diurnal cycles. Brown suggested that rock electricity might be electro-gravatic; in other words, that rock transformed gravity into electricity in a manner similar to the way light is turned into electricity in photo-voltaics.
FIGURE 49: LAURIE STUDIO - ROCK SENSOR ATTACHED TO RATE OF CHANGE CONVERTER.
FIGURE 49: LAURIE STUDIO
ROCK SENSOR ATTACHED TO
RATE OF CHANGE CONVERTER.
When I went to Vermont a few years ago to study dowsing, one of the best parts of the trip was meeting a local Indian artist whose art consisted of finding and displaying unusual rocks. When I first saw him, he had unloaded several tons of them outside of the building where the dowsing classes were being taught. I listened with fascination as he told me the story behind each and every one of them. Of particular interest were his stories of how he went about getting some of the heavier stones out of the woods. As he told it, some could make themselves either much heavier or much lighter than they actually were. All carried unique information which contributed to their ability to be moved.
We all enjoy the geometries of nature, particularly phi ratios that reconcile brute chaos with cosmic and human standards. But we don't encounter those ratios much in raw rock. Jagged mountain peaks are as cold and as formidable and as alien an image as we have on this planet. Yet the standing stones of the Lithic Cultures were able to infuse representations of these peaks with such a powerful sense of human and supernatural beauty that we still respond with awe to their mysterious presence today. I wonder if stone may have a very special ability to store semiotics. Perhaps it isn't gravity that yields the electricity from stone but ZPE! If Alfven Waves require a magnetic interface in the cells of the brain to operate, then what role do they play in the enormous magnetic fields of the earth? Perhaps all the impressions that get formed every minute that become the past are stored not as “thought” in some astral plane, but in the magnetic latticework of rock?
I recently attached some wires to the rock ledge that is visible in the basement of the studio, using a thermal-arc spray system. Sure enough, millivoltages came pouring out. I wanted to have the “pulse” of the studio and be able to turn it into sound. I don't know if these voltages are a true signal or just an artifact of pizeo or petro-voltaics, but I can use them, I suppose, to transmit something into the rock if I could figure out what and why. Maybe rock is a radionic power source? I am thinking out loud.
JOHN NORSEEN
Quoting Duncan: “And if they do, then perhaps all these impressions that get formed every minute that become the past aren't stored in “thought” in the astral plane, but in the magnetic latticework of rock."
Yes...and where do all the souls in the old texts, the myths, and even in the Bible go... to the underworld, to Hades...to a place of Rocks…hot rocks and cold rocks…the containers of the dead? Just like the Semiotic Death Chambers...ashes to ashes, dust to dust...soul to rocks…to the structures that are almost life. And that is why the spirit is in the stone talisman. Wow, and when you cast a stone to kill the wrongdoer, the stone must be clean of past lives...or else you start to stack up semiotic soul energies, and then the stone is the vibrating laser source of semiotic laser light...the light of the living dead. This is a whole new genre of Life and Life Forms and Semiotics. Wild. Absolutely Wild.
The arrowheads actually lead you to the kill…the meteorites once meteors that linked one planet of life to another...to seed it with the life force from distant worlds. Oh this opens up a whole new realm of thought processes. And also why the Fossil is such a powerful semiotic...it is the tomb lid of the life that went into the surrounding rock… It, the fossil, is the O and is the R and is the actual I vector of the living and the dead…the fossil is the yin/yang; it is both and more.
Quoting Duncan: “I recently attached some wires to the rock ledge that is visible in the basement of the studio, using my thermal-arc spray system. Sure enough, millivoltages came pouring out. I wanted to have the "pulse" of the studio and be able to turn it into sound. I don't know if these voltages are a true signal or just an artifact of pizeo or petro-voltaics. I could use them, however, to transmit something into the rock if I could figure out what and why.”
FIGURE 50: BUTTERFLY WING SEMIOTICS
FIGURE 50: BUTTERFLY WING SEMIOTICS
Maybe it should be a radionic power source? Wow. Duncan, now we are getting back to the Submarine stories I keep telling you about…there are parts of the world that share a common underground rock strata linkage...where the substrata in certain rock formations extend across the Atlantic from Rhode Island and Maine over to northern Europe. [Editors note: The rock outcropping upon which the Laurie studio is built, is geologically part of the coast of France!] If you put your ear to the strata, or if a sub puts a sound cone into the rock at the ocean bottom, or into a sea mount, it can quite easily and clearly pick up the pulse recordings; it is very clear and can contain quite complex information…and again, when there would be sudden surges in loss of life, the earth rocks would be filled with life echoes of the departing souls…departing as we are now suggesting into the Earth Rock itself, the Hades, the netherworld of pre-life — rock “civilizations”.
Quoting Duncan: "But is it a life force, or just a superannuated mechanical force?"
ZPE is the unattended energy of the universe… it is the life force that energizes and flows between semiotic channels. It exists, but is life activating when in the proper semiotic structure? The orgone circle is driving me crazy...how does the circle make my palm go cool? Again, it is the ZPE emanating across the orgone semiotic into my hand, interpreted by my mental semiotic constructs. This is energy that makes its way into my life-stream. It is not too contentious or corny to admit that ZPE is both. It depends on the semiotic. And as you so skillfully start off – the semiotic almost sounds like our soul...and may indeed be just that.
Quoting Duncan: “Now, I can't believe these paintings of Van Gogh's had this type of power when the interns at his asylum were using them for target practice following his death. These powers were acquired after the fact, I would suggest, but the images and the intensity invested within them by Van Gogh did provide a window, a powerful enough Representamen to attract attention from that point on. The nature of this window is what interests me, and you can see how it relates to the functional purposes of the shaman!”
Exactly – Remember, it takes an “I” to complete a semiotic. The interns didn't possess an I…or to say it another way...their “I” gave the vector to the object a zero value…a null point...it basically collapsed the semiotic to some misshapen semi-form of potential ZPE…but as the original paintings hung around...like Laotian land mines from Pol Pot, and more and more people began stepping into them, something began to happen. The dehydrated semiotics of the Van Gogh became blood-soaked with new-found "I" and sprang back to semiotic ZPE-laden life…and as you correctly state, became infused with so many ZPE hits and so many different “I” vectors, that the original “O”, became many overlapping O's and I's and R's that it became a “super-semiotic”. But still underlying all this is the creator of the “O”, it, the paintings and that “O” contained the mind and hand of Vincent Van Gogh.
I would suggest that rather than get warped and bummed out about how the mass of I and ZPE and R have polluted the original O...think more about the mind and hand of the O itself. Imagine concentrating on a VVG original in let's say in the Louvre in Paris. Imagine entering the painting and trying to affix to the mind/hand/intent itself. This is the art of riding the semiotic and the Alfven Wave back into the target. Just as I sent you an orgone circle and you can feel the affect on the palm of your hand, do the inverse....go into your mind and feel the affect, and then start to flow back into your hand, across the space to the orgone, or the painting...and then into the painting and back into the originator's mind/hand/intent. Now, linger here inside of VVG and get a feel for this person or event; allow yourself to close your eyes and mentally drift along the ripples and patterns that come to mind. YOU are now inside the original semiotic, the original "O", the original mind/hand/intent. This is the beauty of the Norseen Semiotic…you can journey into the TARGET with your mental faculties on search and record and playback; you can come back with samples, if only abstract thoughts to begin with. As you refine your techniques, you can actually bring back the flavor of the creme de menthe circling in the mouth the night before the painting was made; the dance halls, the sounds of the streets in the late 1800's at night, the smell of the night, mixed in with the feel of the clothes, and the other stains of his mind.
Don't get all caught up in the definitions of the semiotic...the semiotic lives and desiccates and reinvigorates and pulses and lies dormant until the right set of O, I, R, ZPE and AW finally get all in the right amount of knotty string tanglement, and voila, you have the power of the semiotic, of life, of the spiral of life to non-life, to subtle energy, to full power ZPE, to full real life, to memory, to fuzzy recollections…back to INTERNS AND TARGET PRACTICE. Always allow semiotics to open up corridors to wherever they may go...crawl in, seal up the backside, and slide into the MIND/HAND/INTENT. It will take you immediately to some journey and deposit you head over heals back to where you are, simply by an unscheduled cough or sneeze of Memory/Perception.
Some people use books or movies to do this escape routine...but if you think about it, all you need is the Semiotic and an understanding of whether you are the “O”, the “I”, or the “R”, and whose ZPE is involved, and whether you are using your Alfven grid or someone else's....now, be off my good man...be off into the GRIDLIFE.
Quoting Duncan: “Which leads me to the point: why aren't artists utilizing these techniques?” Most I know just try to survive financially and become well known!”
Exactly. Can you imagine if VVG were involved in our discussions and had access to your radionics...and so too for the many “down in the noise” artists you describe… they simply didn't have the tools of the mind, the mind technology that you and I are describing. If you don't have a tool you can't fix the problem. Simply put, these artists didn't have the radionic tools or semiotic understanding to change or reclassify their positions and careers.
Quoting Duncan: “Then today I just received the fascinating article about PEAR that you sent.”
But of course, sir. You are so absolutely correct, don't stumble over your own bounce back thoughts...the demonstration you describe is right on the bearing...keep asking your mind to guide you into the actual event...don't worry...you will create the kind of Semiotic Mortar that you are imagining...it will reach right up and Zap you. You already have the answer…just allow it to manifest itself in an actual event...and think of it this way...when you do Kick Off the Episode - you will be moving tons of ZPE around like firewater, opening up Semiotic channels like crazy, and vortexing O and I and R like imagery of the mind.
Remember, people and souls and energy move into zones of complexity and structure...the Romans filed into the gladiatorial stadiums...and so did the gladiators, as did the animals, and the SOUL WORKS of the games, those that would lose their lives and spill their blood...all for the spectacle...It took all of it to make it happen...take any part of it away, the blood, the gladiators, the stadium, the animals...and it would not be THE GAMES. If the sequence or Alfven Wave grid were off line, it wouldn't happen…it would be some odd still birth of an event; imagine all the pieces of the GAMES were there, but the gladiators were on the top rows and the victims were mauled by the animals in the tunnels beneath the view of the crowd. YOU SEE, all of the components of the Semiotic must be in place or the true event never takes place.
When all the pieces are in order, the GAMES BEGIN...so let your mind quietly steer you as the semiotic master, and let you orchestrate the items of your EXPERIMENT...and then...LET THE GAMES BEGIN...energy flows into complex structures of energy...and there is intense order in chaos...in fact, a little bit of Chaos is going to be very, very important to your episode on the other side of the O.
DUNCAN LAURIE
Last night I again had an interesting dream. I was in a car some friends were driving at high speeds around the countryside. I was stretched out in the back; it was like a limo, I was so far behind the wheel. I felt very happy and quite as conscious as I am now. Our car proceeds to get into all types of predicaments that should cause it to slow down or get stuck, but it only goes faster. At one point we barrel across a shallow wash that looks like a still pond. Now I know something is funky. Looking around, I realize the landscape is Middle Eastern, but slightly more upscale than what we see on TV. Then we come to a bottleneck, and when we come out the other side we are flying low to the ground; the car has disappeared. Coming at us is a convoy of fast moving armor; it is huge. The tires are many stories high and we are the size of a bird to an ordinary tank. We weave around and through the onslaught as though we are invisible.
Then I began to think, I’m seeing moving objects, but I hear nothing. My friends communicate via telepathy. Everything is very, very vivid. It is definitely my full consciousness, experiencing something powerful but for no known reason. Suddenly my attention is completely disincarnate. The interpretation of semiotics continues unabated. I suddenly realize this experience is demonstrating to me that my brain can construct a semiotic representation of myself, including all my emotional responses, and inject it into a seemingly real environment that is a complete artifact of my consciousness. While inside, I can’t tell whether the environment in question is actually a “place”, or whether it is a construct. Assuming it is a construct, it is one that anticipated my reactions. It existed in three dimensions, in the round, and emerged spontaneously as the car sped forward. That is a lot of semiotics; it needs a big computer that can simultaneously track what is going on outside the car as well as how I’m responding to it.
I would suggest there was more information being generated in that dream than what I normally encounter in my daily life. So, one might conclude that the “construct” was more intrinsically complex than the world around us. This is to say that “art” created by my brain functions can be a more powerful representation of reality than the outside world, even more so when powerful meaning is present in the content.
The dream suggests that intent from the hidden world behind our eyes has created these “fuel cells” of matter for the sake of projecting semiotics into form. All the time we sit here, smugly believing that we are the primary source of interpretation for this world of semiotics, when in fact we are probably just a Representamen designed by some higher intelligence to pursue its PRIZE in this medium.
So, going back to design, can a radionics device be designed in such a way that it enables the subject to stand apart from personally identifying with the stream of semiotics bombarding them, and actually allow the form of that higher intelligence to emerge into consciousness?
And Is It Art?
JOHN NORSEEN
You say, “Assuming it was a construct, then it was one that anticipated my reactions. That is a lot of semiotics; it needs a big computer that can simultaneously track what is going on outside the car as well as how I’m responding to it.”
Behold the power of ZPE...Remember, when you open up the ORI in the NS you automatically gain the universe of ZPE. Now there are a couple ways to describe how to permit what happened. What seems like you are being anticipated by your dreams may actually be the inherent delays and “catch-ups” that are part of Perception and Subception. Very often we perceive at SLOWER RATES than we actually think, so the drama may already be spun out and waiting for you, the dreamer, to catch up with the action. And then, when you finally enter the scene, it resumes normal flow and you don't perceive the start-ups and stops.
It is much like a finished film. It appears as one continuous frame flowing into another, but in reality it has been chopped and edited many times. Dreaming, especially the lucid dreaming you are describing, is running on at least two and probably many more time cycles and time scales; Theta dialogue, and Alpha dialogue, and Delta, with ZPE and Alfven Waves distorting this and inserting that. But the great semiotic film editor, carefully, and in the nick of time, blends it all together so that you have full zoom in ORI.
Or maybe you were caught up in a semiotic loop in a brain circuit that didn't go anywhere near your Auditory memory banks. You bypassed that sub-circuit; that is why you heard no sound. Also, in dreams, there is no NOISE. You are in the circuit; you are the signal; that is why everything is so exact, so crisp – no interference. For instance, you may at some time experience a Dream solely of Color, nothing else, Color with no noise, no interference, just you experiencing color. Now if I had my special FMRI and you were in the Color Dream, I could see energy patterns in the back of your head, in specific regions of the occipital lobe. If you were in a tight little interactive feedback loop, with a string down into the hippocampus, we could literally show the Dream in Color circuit, and that is where you would be applying all the semiotics, and ZPE and Alfven Waves, but caught in a little corner of the brain universe...with one other string attaching you to the brain/reality, the striatum. Dreams all have a Time Master which enters at some point and the dream is over. The bell rings, and you switch into another thought realm. NOW, imagine that silently, some trickster, some inktomi…sneaks in with semiotic scissors and clips the string to the striatum. There is no more time. You are in the Color Dream forever; but you wouldn't care...it would become your world.
In our search for art, we must be on the look out for such islands where time is lost.
---
13 SHADOWS and SYNESTHESIA
JOHN NORSEEN
Shadows. I wanted to let you know I am spending a lot of "ART" time on Shadows, their NS attachment and influence on us. Just take a look in any picture that shows a person's shadow…it can become any of many amazing shapes, from blobs closely tied to the feet of our target person, to stretched out, elongated stick figure blackness that turns a 6 foot being into three or more times its squeezed size. Are we really aware of all that the shadow does for us? It sends out quiet signals into the brains of others...very quickly and very quietly making that brain aware or not aware that you are there. Shadows cloak us and spot us. They are always with us, ready to leap into action and protect us. And Shadows enforce our predatory nature. They send the amygdala of smaller beings into overdrive – hearts racing until the black shape passes by – uneventful – life allowed to continue.
In my first Web work, I discuss the power of shadows as one of the main Semiotics in the brain. I first noted the power of shadows on my central nervous system when I became aware of how I would involuntarily blink, or my shoulders cringe, every time I would drive my car under a highway overpass.
I would approach the overpass on a bright Fall day; as I would pass underneath I was bathed in the shadow of the bridge, for just a moment; I was under the spell of that bridge, under the power of the shadow it cast upon me...and I would feel like some twittering, cowering rabbit in the dark presence of an eagle or hawk…I would tighten up my entire body; my shoulders would creep up my neck, my head would tilt in partial duck…and then the moment would be there; I would be engulfed in the shadow, locked into the tractor beam of the dark light...my eyes would momentarily close in a blink of capitulation, and then miraculously, on the other side of the overpass, in the sun fully once more, the shoulders would lighten up…the eyes adjust to the brightness, the heart and pulse would drop to lower levels, and even a small sigh of relief would work its way to the surface of my breath. The Danger to the Amygdala was gone. Just as the stinging sound of the bee an inch from my face drove me nuts, now also, the dissipated shadow had just moments before driven me temporarily insane.
And then I thought, (as my eyes blinked and my shoulders hunched during the hour long trip down the road with the many overpasses and bridges overhead), what if I could figure out a “Shadow Beam Weapon”? I could drive a pilot or a tank commander nuts, making them think below the level of rational thought...that the shadows would always be there...never able to escape the next shadow attack. Over time, much like windburn on a windy day, the effects of constant shadow would surely take the psychological toll. I could wear out my opponent with mere blinking and hunching…I realized I could make Shadow WEAPONS.
So the next time you are sitting in the front seat of a car and you are approaching an highway overpass, just take a moment to prepare yourself to experience what an amazing thing it is to pass through a shadow...and as the bridge approaches, think about what you will experience....you will be in the shadow and you will feel your entire body tighten up…your eyes will blink…and then you are through it, and wow!
We are responding to shadows; they creep in suddenly and take over our heart and breathing and muscles. How can you stop that? You can't! And that is the very true power of shadows.
Shadows are mysterious little NS that turn on and turn off the spigots of ZPE –behold the power of SHADOW.
DUNCAN LAURIE
Yessiree, those shadows are mean mothers. I remember dreams as a young kid of being very, very small; shrunken below the size of the grass in our back yard, and suddenly feeling the ominous presence of large moving objects through their thunder-cloud like shadows. Later, I became acquainted with a different meaning of shadows; Jung’s notion of the Shadow archetype. That’s when I realized those shadows weren’t dreams at all.
According to Jung, archetypes are autonomous psychic beings that inhabit our collective unconscious. These beings are familiar from mythology as The Wise Old Man, The Devouring Mother or Crone, The Anima/Animus, The Shadow and many others. According to Jung, any archetype can take possession of our consciousness in various ways and at varying strengths. Once we become aware of the presence of an archetype operating within us, we begin to engage it. Jung called this process Individuation, meaning that the integration of the archetype(s) into full consciousness will result in a fully integrated personality.
Jung discovered that when his patients created drawings and doodles during the course of therapy many of these archetypal elements revealed themselves in the imagery. As their condition improved, as they integrated the rogue archetypes, their drawings became more and more mandalic, culminating in very beautiful renditions of the squaring of the circle, symbolizing the individual self getting in harmony with the cosmos. Here, particularly, the artistic product smacks of the NS. The patient creates a Representamen (as art) of his psyche (O) which he then interprets (I) for the benefit of his health and well-being. We haven’t discussed semiotics much in terms of spiritual aspirations, but any examination of Jung, and particularly the Shadow, almost forces the issue.
Jung described the archetypes as intelligent and autonomous beings that could waste us or graduate us depending upon how we grasped their import. To date, to my knowledge, we have not assigned such an anthropomorphic and independent identity to the NS. That is not to say it is not there, perhaps we have not recognized it. These very powerful symbol systems have access to life energy; call it ZPE, they should be identical. When many responses across different cultures, such as your shadow experience, occur day in and day out, even across species, it is reasonable to assume that a field structure grows up around them. They become an aspect of our collective consciousness. In a small way, this illustration is like a radionic rate that becomes more potent to cure a condition the more widely it is used.
These massive resonant fields may in fact be autonomous, lending their energy to each solitary experience like sunlight to vegetation. In one of Jung’s books, there is a picture of a man hard at work polishing his Jaguar. It is an illustration of how car fetishes can become repositories for unresolved anima conflicts. Basically, on one level, Jung was able to demonstrate how predatory these archetypes can be to human energy. On the other had, he gave ample evidence from his practice that a point comes when the archetype, facing expulsion from consciousness, can turn around and become an enormous asset to personality integration and spiritual growth.
The Shadow is particularly significant in this respect because it contains all the negative and destructive potential of the psyche. It is called the Shadow because, for the most part, it is invisible to us. We get tastes here and there as it bleeds through our routine activity and invades our normal life. It is the part of ourselves who’s existence we deny.
Jung found that dreams were particularly helpful in ascertaining the true nature of the forces inherent in our wider consciousness. Oddly enough, the more one reads Jung, the more vivid these dreams become. Their lucidity becomes a complete metaphorical overlay where every potent aspect of our life is assigned a character in our dream. Naturally, the archetypes are there too, weighing in on the situation. It all becomes terribly mythological and symbolic and artistic and complicated and psychological. One would hardly think that plain symbols could pose such a sophisticated challenge to identity.
Yet, according to Jung at least, there is method to the madness. As fully conscious, awake personalities, we seem to be able to bend the semiotic fields in our vicinity in such a way as to make them aid us in our work. At rest, or in any imagination charged environment, the tables turn. We become like a recording medium upon which the semiotic dance is played. We interact so far as we can, but often enough we are like children being guided by the hand. This sense of purpose or guidance is what distinguishes the Jungian approach, if indeed it is fair to call it semiotic, from the Peircean model in which semiotics are viewed as still very mechanical in nature.
The Norseen Semiotic has a much broader and much more ambiguous identity than what I have understood from Peirce, and even Sharov. It is more like the world of Jung: anthropomorphic, energetically complex, and psychologically profound. I see this in the way you approach the shadow/Shadow…as a weapon! If there ever was a way that the Shadow wanted the shadow to be used, it’s as a weapon! But turn the equation around in the Jungian sense and see what you get. The Shadow wants Norseen to engage it on the mythical level and expel it from his consciousness. And there you are, in the most perfect environment ever designed by Man to explore shadows, a shadow organization within a shadow government with an even more shadowy agenda!
JOHN NORSEEN
Back to the NS…I am getting the sense that NS is like Hydrogen and Helium...it is everywhere in the universe...any place where conditions would allow two independent Objects to attempt to communicate with each other...or, down to ONE OBJECT considering itself. And, it can span the non-living to living gap that is just sitting out there waiting to be explained.
Eventually in space-time, a living object will attempt to communicate with a non-living object, and the result will be some movement toward life in the inanimate object,, and some reconsideration of what life is in the living object, with the implication that at some point a third (Shadow) semiotic or God Object will manifest itself and provide a steering mechanism among the triad. Now this situation sets up all kinds of relationships…dust, to man, via God, to dust…replete with positive steering vector semiotics in the forms of positive angelic beings and negative dark soul energies.
Getting back to the basic questions at NSA: how to search for such semiotics, and how to know when you found them? My gosh, since we have been corresponding, the NS is everywhere. I would say it is even the missing energy of the universe — anywhere you have an NS you get Objects linked together into a structure. This level of intent is complexity…it represents a force every bit as important as a Vanderwals force that keeps the atom contained into a workable domain of uncertainty. It keeps the atom in a box that can be used to form other structures and levels of complexity...so too does the NS.
NS can also account for Intent and Will and Consciousness acting upon the universe to keep it from dissipating into entropy. If indeed the NS occupies mass, then there is every reason to calculate that NS can account for the dark matter that keeps the universe from total disappearance.
So I am going to be bold. NS is the universal Communication Structure. It is what ties the living and the non-living together and allows for the transfer of ZPE across the universe. And in the very special conditions (Quantum Phase) of human thought and God conceptualization, it can operate beyond the physical laws of the universe, and thus even provides Extra-Ordinary gifts to human consciousness to probe and to use such NS communication channels to span the universe and to know of God.
So, if a life form were to attempt to communicate with humanity it would have to be in such a manner that the human brain would get the signal, and would be able to discern that the signal was different than any other human NS...it would be slightly, to magnificently, different than hearing, seeing, feeling, speaking to oneself, dreaming, imagination, deja vu...and all the other myriad categories of human appreciation…even ART. It would have to be something familiar but definitely unique...approaching the SYNESTHESIA.
When I was in Toledo, Spain I visited the ART of Goya and I focused in on his Last Supper. The disciples painted were from the local insane asylum because Goya surmised that the insane were closer to God than more normal human beings. Goya was choosing the vector I described above…the dust-human-(insane)-angelic/darkness antinomy-God loop of the NS.
Duncan…do you see what is happening to US as we explore the universal conditions for the NS and our appreciation for ART...from Goya, to McKenna, to Jung et al? We are looking at their work with a new, vibrant appreciation of the underlying power that propels them again and again into the minds of the future…how their ART controls future Interpretation and leverages ZPE to keep them alive, as NS objects. Talk about a free energy engine…ART in the form of NS is able to journey across Space-Time, held at a minimum as a thought MEME, needing only to land somewhere in between the non-living and the living to seek out the I to renew life and ZPE.
So, as we contemplate what is required for future “Artificial Life” and further future SENTIENT LIFE --- it most certainly must contain a self-awareness structure, none other than the NS, in order to be launched across the cosmos. Now, we know that machines can create the R of themselves, and machines can outline their boundaries and define themselves as O, but only when we can faithfully introduce I inside a machine, to truly create an NS=O, R, I — then we can launch machines to seek out new life and new civilizations out there...and also deep inside our own brains. This is the goal of my NanoBioFusion Research Project that was funded by LM corporate with GE corporate R&D center and Princeton, to develop the modeling and simulation techniques to produce nanoscale (one neuron length) bioparticles that can fuse to represent knowledge as O, R, I particles. Deep Shadow Technology.
---
14 DEATH SEMIOTICS
DUNCAN LAURIE
(Summary of a long conversation with John Norseen) Theta is the level of brain activity at the border of death where all options are taken away; where quantum outcomes occur. We will refer later to this event as 21 Grams (the mass lost from the body at the time of death).
My question, does the semiotic component of the psyche have mass? Norseen's response: 21 grams is the weight of the software needed to run the semiotics. (Reference research at the U. of Virginia Brain Foundation and Human Genome Foundation); 90% of the proteins made by the genes are for the brain. I keep asking whether the 21 grams etc. are being studied by scientists, via measurements etc.; Norseen mentions the Army Foreign Intelligence Community Cray supercomputers as having measured all the nuances of the life-death interface.
Segue to the much discussed anti-submarine warfare event: An interesting convergence of frequencies occur in the 7-10 Hz range. Subs scan for other subs in the 7-8 Hz region. Eight-hertz is the reported frequency measured from the hands of healers (Puharich). In addition, 7.8 Hz is the Earth's resonant frequency or Schumann Resonance, purported to play a biological role in our makeup, directly stimulating the pineal gland and release of neuro-transmitter melatonin. The point being is that men in these subs spend countless hours at equipment monitoring frequencies in this range. At one point, they began to notice what Norseen called "fringe patterns" forming a kind of cloud around their subs. A significant inquiry was made to locate the source of these signals: earthquake triangulation, sonar artifacts, lightening etc; none correlated. The only correlation was to the quantities of people dying in the vicinity of their sub; i.e. a resonant coupling was occurring between the dying souls and the 8 Hz detectors on the subs.
FIGURE 51: LYAPUNOV FUNCTION AND GREEN FUNCTION
FIGURE 51: LYAPUNOV FUNCTION AND GREEN FUNCTION
Norseen explained that this coupling effect could be expressed as a “Lyapunov Function”. This function is two curves that are plotted to represent the interactive relationship between two complimentary systems such as pH and oxygen in the blood. In the current instance around the sub, the curves being coupled were from non-life to life back to non-life, describing the subtle discriminations between these states in and around physical death. The communications that take place while in these subtle states are semiotic. By definition, this is an elastic relationship, but one where information is flowing back and forth, shaping the outcome. Lyapunov functions can be further included in a Green function measurement of overall system thought-put, technical jargon that is not further explained.
The communications described are instantaneous, and to describe how that is possible, Norseen introduced two additional factors: Zero Point Energy and Alfven Waves. Zero Point Waves (ZPE) having been introduced earlier in the manuscript. This energy of the vacuum has actually been measured and is called the Casimir Effect. The Casimir Effect is measurable when two metal plates are placed extremely close together (1 nanometer). The vacuum created interferes with the flow of ZPE and has been scientifically measured. The result is that the plates are drawn together, as if by magnetic attraction. Norseen points out by comparison that the identical 1 nanometer distance is the distance between brain cells, thereby implying a stage for ZPE coupling. As these distances open and close between the cells, a signal impressed upon the ZPE can be generated out in the 5-30 Hz. range.
How it becomes an instantaneous signal reaching anywhere in the universe is accomplished by the Alfven Wave (AW). Norseen’s definition of Alfven waves is that of a magnetic string stretched out, and then impinged upon by unique traveling magnetic resonant structures...like plucking a magnetic harp. Theoretically, Alfven waves interconnect all parts of the universe via magnetic fields. Magnetite within the brain cells connect local magnetic swirls to the magnetic river or storms existing locally or outside our magnetosphere. Norseen describes the AW as a universal plasma that extends between local and non-local events, capable of carrying semiotic communications via directed ZPE pulsation. These signals are capable of penetrating the magnetic storm, in the same way radio signals penetrate our congested airways carrying selective information from point to point.
At this point in the discussion Norseen described a brain operation he saw on television recently. The operation was to restore a patient's arm from paralysis. First, the surgeon located a spot near the surface of the brain that affected the paralysis. Next, he went deep into the core of the brain where a similar nexus of nerves controlled the same function, and proceeded to do corrective action. Norseen's point to me was that in the brain itself, a Representamen was created at the surface of the brain of the (Object) nerve source at the center of the brain. It saw it as an example of semiotic structure within the brain's design itself.
Synthetic Prions at Nano Level
Norseen went on to say Theta waves (5-8 Hz) are the navigational key to establishing resonance between the inner and outer structures of the brain. In order for the brain to establish a proper Lyapunov function with the universe, these inner and outer brain structures must obtain resonance; they must lock in phase with each other. The inner and outer structures must mirror each other, not in frequency or amplitude but in phase, creating "wavelets" that are the expression of this coherence. Once this phase relationship is established, then and only then can the brain function successfully using the ZPE and Alfven wave conversion (becoming responsible for producing the super sensory effects of PSI and cosmic, visionary immersion.) This is why we sleep, to enter a semiotic state of 3-7 Hz Delta or 1 Hz Theta, where gene expression and proteins lay down learned memory and behavior patterns — as neural circuits triggered by external or internal semiotics.
The Globus Pallidus (GP) is a part of the brain that messages without language. These messages can be stored for seconds or up to an hour (or even much longer)…even if one consciously forgets the information. For instance, you can't find your keys; still, something in you knows where they are, but can't language it. Nevertheless, it guides you around your house by intuition, operating at Theta. The GP can control everything in the body except speech. It has not evolved neuron linkages into Broca, Wernicke, or the Temporal Cortex 22, nor Broadmann’s area 43/44, other than to impulse grunts, groans, screams, and squeals. The body language that cannot form speech.
FIGURE 52: GLOBUS PALLIDUS
FIGURE 52: GLOBUS PALLIDUS
The GP communicates with the Hunt, and can be directed anywhere, to any target, even a conceptual one. Norseen calls it a "conceptual semiotic sensor", a Representamen of the brain that will go anywhere to investigate anything. Examples are the Vagus Nerve signaling us via gut reactions, or pictures in the brain — eidetic images, archetypes, visions…all coded to inform us about future probabilities. It cannot access speech, therefore the GP is for the most part ineffable communication.
The GP operates the phase characteristics of the semiotic communications in the brain. At the end of the day, we reach a point where we have to make a trade off; do we allow ourselves to give up control in order to roam different alternative realities in deep sleep? The fact is that the more time we spend in Theta (deep sleep), the more capable we become later of change and adaptation. The bottom line is the Hunt for potential alternative scenarios to the proscribed outcome of our day to day circumstances is worth giving up the control of the body for a significant period each night.
In this regard, the semiotic is the repository of a specifically charged piece of information. Laboratory rats will hit a button to trigger the sexual reaction in the brain long after their physical pleasure is spent, even to the point of death. The semiotic is discharging information into the mind/body of the individual, and need not be triggered by the stimuli for which it is designed.
In the case of revolutionary art, for instance, a resonance imbedded in the art, suggests Norseen, could trigger certain semiotic combinations, producing associations that profoundly effect the viewer. As to the effects of deliberate rhythm entrainment frequencies being used in this manner commercially today, he mentioned the popular music group NO DOUBT as being "off the chart" in his measurement of their application of these tools.
Going back to visiting the Russian semiotics team in the 1990s, Norseen relates an amusing story. It involves two visits to the Double Eagle Saloon in Las Cruces, New Mexico. [It was during a national security sponsored evaluation of Russian Semiotics.] Well beyond his first drink, Norseen went into a semiotic trance and experienced something akin to a walk-in experience with the astral denizens of the saloon. As he explains it, "we shared bandwidth with each other". They gave him access to their perceptions via shared vision, while he provided warmth, taste, touch, smell (and booze). Apparently the result was very wild. Norseen demonstrated an ability to remotely see events not available to the rational minds with him in the bar.
The next time he found himself at the Double Eagle, it was with a group of Russian semioticians with whom he was collaborating. This eclectic group was formed in the early 1960's by a Soviet General that set up a secret program of covert reflexive control operations with the KGB and GRU now under the direction of a certain Dr. Pospelov, of extreme interest to Lt. General Ken Minihan, the Director of NSA (DIRNSA). Norseen was tired when they arrived. Then, as he walked in, the lights of the saloon went crazy. The one person capable of working the entire bar, physical and non-physical, had arrived. As Norseen worked his way into trance once again, the entities allowed him to enter the minds of his Russian colleagues, probing their thoughts and memories. To their horrified surprise he began casually rattling off the contents of their mind. At the conclusion of the story, Norseen was careful to point out that every one of these Russians (save the general with the gold tooth) is now dead or incapacitated.
Norseen next mentioned telling this same story at the bar at the Naval War College, in the company of people familiar with the sensitive databases lost in the World Trade Center attack. Apparently Cantor-Fitzgerald housed a database for all military transactions worldwide and the back-ups were at Morgan Stanley. If certain transactions involving arms purchases were occurring somewhere in the world, this database would inform the Pentagon and appropriate counter-measures could be enabled. For many weeks thereafter, various arms shipments around the world could no longer be tracked.
Norseen also speculated there may have been beacons installed in the towers that would have guided the planes to the appropriate floors, even if the terrorists had failed to guide the planes correctly.
In additional speculation, Cantor-Fitzgerald would have maintained the database that contained the death energy statistics from the submarines. Apparently a Lyapunov function had been established between the death energies and the arms ratios that were providing some insight into the suicide bombing world. I was curious to know more about the relationship of death to semiotics and what this had to do with weaponry. I also wanted to know where in our government or academic world these kinds of ideas were being researched. Concerning the latter, he mentioned by name, The Electro-Magnetic Spectrum Laboratory in Denver as being involved in the death energy research.
In response to the former, Norseen pointed out that Attorney General Ashcroft had legally excused the Government and everyone else from any liability or responsibility for experimentation occurring between 1 and 100 Hz. He also pointed out that the National Telecom Information Agency (NTIA), with the largest charter of any governmental agency, was now the most powerful governmental agency in the U.S.
In looking at the origins and activities of the NTIA, he went back to the early 60's Mind Domination program in semiotics. He further mentioned that the CIA chief in Beirut at the time of the suicide bombing of the barracks was also in the stadium where Sadat was assassinated and also had been seen around Oswald in Mexico, monitoring each developing event. He also mentioned that the Russian Semiotic Core that he was involved in training acted like they had discovered these ideas, while in fact they picked them up in Georgetown in the 1980's. When asked by me whether these new forms of warfare were accepted today, he replied the military does understand this warfare; particularly Donald Rumsfeld, Andy Marshall and the Reform the Pentagon Group.
Although not directly related to the issues around semiotic history, Norseen did mention two other interesting corollaries. One involved the recent controversy around Dr. Raymond Damadian, previously mentioned, who was excluded by the Nobel Prize Committee for their Prize in Medicine for his part in the discovery of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. Dr. Damadian was in fact the first medical researcher who, upon looking at a test tube sample to which magnetic resonance was being applied, wondered whether the magnetic signature could differentiate between diseased and healthy tissue.
Norseen viewed Damadian's exclusion from the Prize as a way of taking public attention off the topic of what could be described as a future "energy medicine". Such developments could result in a re-examination of Homeopathy and Radionics and as well as invigorating the alternative physics described by researchers like Dr. William A. Tiller. It also would eventually lead in the direction of the PSYOP weapons research described here.
Norseen also mentioned in this context the need for certain factions of organized religion to direct scientific discovery. It came up in the context of discussing Alfven's work for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize.
Centuries before, St. Thomas Aquinas had formulated the religious dogma of the universe arising from out of nothing for the Catholic Church. In modern times, Abbe Gregoris LeMaitre, at the Vatican, had been the first to propose the Big Bang theory for the formation of the universe. Not satisfied, Alfven countered, if the Big Bang were true, why did complete structures exist at the outer edges of the universe? Alfven's theory proposed the existence of magnetic waves that interconnected all parts of the universe. Structurally this opposed the Big Bang theory of local magnetic swirls gradually condensing down into matter, thrust out from an event eons ago.
From the Norseen view point, an Intent causes a local Alfven wave (carrying semiotics) to pulse outward looking for associated semiotics, which, when found, connect via Zero Point Energy. According to Norseen, at the Life-Death Interface, a variety of semiotics cross from one state to another, revealing a new form of communication. As he was mentioning this, I wondered if specially constructed large masses of rock like the pyramids or even standing stones functioned as some type of semiotic attractor for disembodied souls. These structures had served throughout pre-history as sites of worship and entombment. Could they also magnify the earth's resonant frequency and surrounding brain wave frequencies, resulting in “shared bandwidth”?
In returning to my question about how the death semiotics functioned as a weapon, Norseen returned to the story of the submarines. The technicians monitoring the EM fields around their subs saw around them corona-like signals that looked like noise. They were neither animal, nor plankton nor earthquake nor anything else; in fact the only correlation that could be made was with great loss of life in the vicinity of the sub. Similarly, remote viewers trying to communicate with the subs (which operated long wave antennas), were listening for the communications pathways which correlated with the life-death interface. The signals coming from the subs acted like a beacon, attracting the semiotics of the recently dead still active in translation, in a resonate fashion. But the coupling went both ways; the crews on board the subs were also impacted by the semiotics of the dead. The result for the crew was a heightened psi bandwidth capability, just as Norseen experienced in the Double Eagle Saloon. (This has a fascinating design potential.)
CONSIDERING GAUSSIAN, HEURISTIC AND EMPIRICAL GROUPINGS
CLASS I Noise cancels Noise - Signal Emerges
CLASS II Noise cancels Signal - Attention Scattering
New Singal - Focus of Attention
CLASS III Noise mimics other Noise - Encryption
CLASS IV Noise becomes / is Signal
Signal must include Noise
It was soon discovered that every receiver was also a transmitter (as in radionics!). Also, as every signal, i.e. soul, has their own identity; each has to know its own self or Representamen. These strong, unique and discreet signals of the life-death interface were powerful Alfven waves that connected related signal/semiotics to themselves. As a result, these energies could be built into a wave-guide that effectively captured life energy at the moment around death. Once harnessed, the souls could potentially be channeled into a literal “death ray”, with the ability to rip apart matter. Norseen said, "Imagine a transmitter of jumbled intent being popped upon space-time, vectored into a space and exploded like a bomb. Or a pulsed weapon with every fifth soul brighter than the others — a tracer!"
The crew members of the subs whose brains had been so sensitized by the dead were usually, he stated, conscripted into PSYOP to track souls for advanced weapons design. Areas such as the war zones of Africa which suddenly saw the death rate rising 3% or more over the birth rate would be suspect, suggested Norseen, for they may be indicative of harvesting.
Norseen noted that experiments along these lines but of a more modest scale were conducted by the Soviet psychotronic researchers in the 1970’s. He mentioned Dimitri Ustinov, Secretary of Defense in Russia; perhaps the most powerful man in Russia at the time. (Ustinov was the figure behind both the Sputnick and the Psychotronic Initiative.)
When I asked, “What does Norseen derive from our conversation?”, he answered, “It allows me to project intent along a PSYOP vector”. In other words, design a weapon. A weapon is anything that prevents or constrains intent, i.e. prevents some desired goal from occurring. By the same token in radionics, a “cure” occurs when you remove the “intent” of the disease.
In concluding our long conversation, Norseen stated that “‘Semiotics is the currency of the universe”. His statement arose from our attempts to capsulize the Norseen Semiotic. “Identity is the foremost component of semiotics; remove identity and you have a problem. Good semiotic structure equals instantaneous communication.”
INFORMATION BATTLESPACE TECHNOLOGIES
Professional Use of NOISE
DUNCAN LAURIE
I want to come back to the point about what happens at death, in semiotic terms. You must have got me going because I had another flood of images last night. I woke up feeling that I better go back to the incident I told you about, the death of Jane Morgan on Pan Am 103. Jane had a lot of reservations on various planes that day, and by the worst of luck chose Pan Am 103 to fly. Even before her death was confirmed, I began feeling her presence very forcefully, especially her agitation, anger and desperation. I contacted a few sensitives who were able to give me some impressions beyond my own about what Jane was experiencing.
One, an English psychic, was able to track her post mortem movements and progress with some degree of clarity, and was entirely selfless in conveying the whole experience. Here in the U.S., I also contacted another friend who is an absolute genius in this sort of thing. I want to mention a few things about that experience, as my contact with Jane continued far beyond the night of her death.
At first, I began to notice that when Jane wanted my attention, sometimes she interfered with my electronics. In one instance, part of a copy of a poem I was writing about the incident in my fax machine became very distended and wavy like it was on stretched elastic. Other times, lights would blink off, etc. At one point, my clairvoyant friend was visiting my studio in New York. I was showing her the music machine. We were straying from the original intent of the meeting (communicating with Jane) when suddenly all the volume levers on the mixer were suppressed. This continued for some time. Both of us were astounded that no amount of manipulation at our end would bring the sound up until we asked Jane to let go of the controls. It was immediate as soon as Jane got our attention.
What became clear, which my friend confirmed many other times, was that her clairvoyant ability to act as a liaison between the living and the dead was powered by our emotional need to communicate with each other, the Intent.
Jane's death had precipitated a landslide of issues for me. I employed every means I could find to get a handle on them. At one point, I contacted Michael Bradford, the inventor of the music machine I had been using. He was living in New Jersey with his family and associates, developing some technology with a computer company. At Michael's invitation, I was encouraged to try his equipment in a slightly different way than usual. Michael was always telling people that he could "time travel” -- by which he meant traveling to parallel worlds using his music technology, not necessarily through time. I thought, of course, that this meant astral travel, travel in the mind. Actually, he meant physical travel.
FIGURE 53: JANE MORGAN – PAN AM 103 VICTIM, DECEMBER 1988
FIGURE 53: JANE MORGAN – PAN AM 103 VICTIM, DECEMBER 1988
To my skeptical mind, it was a put on, but a very funny one the way he told it. He even got his wife, who was a very straight housewife, to insist it was true. She was great. She complained that time traveling together became too much for her with her mundane responsibilities. Also, there were the embarrassments, like the times Michael would get back and be only partially visible for hours.
Anyhow, I liked all of them a lot and wasn't prepared to throw any cold water on the fun. So, it was somewhat of a surprise when Michael offered to help me contact Jane. I was hoping I was going to go spiraling off into some other world, but that didn’t happen. All I saw was an odd light bleeding off the edges of something "else" on either side of me as I lay on the bed.
More importantly, what did occur was that at one point in the session I began to "hear" Jane, as though her essence had been reduced to a poignant melody. As I concentrated on the melody, I moved deeper and deeper into a state of feeling her essence. The experience was very trance like and required full concentration. At the most intense moments, a miniature visual of her would pop into view, just a few inches high in the air before me. It would pop out again if I tried to grasp at the experience too forcefully. This communication went on for a while, and was very emotionally vivid. I don't remember any actual communication in words or ideas, everything was impressions, mainly audible and felt. I experienced Jane's essence as a very pure form of music that erased all ego barriers.
I am aware that all this sounds very sentimental and un-semiotic in nature, but there are a few points to be made. The semiotic view, as you explain it, while allowing for consciousness and acknowledging the power of intent, appears to function through what we have been calling resonance. That description doesn't elaborate on the role of emotion in the equation. Of course, emotion is basically considered something exclusive to higher life forms, not withstanding my work with plants.
My experience is that emotion is probably the most potent stimulus for the semiotic or ZPE transactions you describe. Apparently no one is discussing it that way.
When the emotion is taken out of the semiotic equation, we are left with the structure, and you have emphasized how powerful structure is in your previous emails. You also suggest that 90% of the semiotics we encounter are Representamen. The remaining 10% could include the people and animals we love or share experience with, interaction with nature, and deep dreamless sleep. All these are experiences known not just by their structure but much more so by their emotional connotations. Even in deep, dreamless sleep where our identity becomes erased in symbolic terms, there is still emotional recollection when we awake, that the experience felt wonderful!
For me, the force required to see and hear are initially emotional before they become symbolic. Touch is the first language, and the language of the skin is emotional. If symbolic experiences are amplified via ZPE, then ZPE must have a primary relationship to emotion.
When you hear stories of people lost for long periods of time or subject to extreme danger, all they focus on is getting back to their loved ones. Emotional extremes reduce the Representamen to nothing; only contact with "O" remains to give comfort. Even memories are Representamen with emotional meaning keeping them alive. Would you agree that the most potent semiotic "force" we recognize is emotion? Going back to Jane; when I experienced her as melody, was that her, a Representamen of her life, or was it a Representamen of my memory of her? Perhaps it was the actual object of Jane's soul, perceived as music to my consciousness? I tend to think so. If emotional energy or charge is at the core of Identity, of Life itself, then comprehending the relationship of semiotics to radionics to ZPE to what most people understand as art becomes much clearer and more profound.
JOHN NORSEEN
There is this great picture taken on the scene at sea on the WaterTown in 1924. Two sailors on the ship died and had just been buried at sea, when the crew said, "There they are, looking back at us from the swell". The visions lasted long enough for the captain to fetch his camera, aim it, focus and click. Sure to nimrod, there are the faces of the two men, beckoning back to their shipmates, and via Representamen, the world at large for beyond time.
Your mental communications with Jane are very true and very common for people that can tune in and zone in on the "emotional" feelings of loved ones. For me it is kind of like being on the phone and hearing or feeling a beeper of another incoming call and suddenly I am able to appraise the feelings as they are ongoing in a loved one, even across the globe. The way I like to account for this in the brain, is that we can multiplex in up frequencies and down frequencies. You are talking on the phone in Beta waves but are able to continue cognitive processes of the other phone call, not in Timeshare or bandwidth share, but in a down sync into the Alpha or Theta state brain wave. You can do this right now...listen to the radio or TV or other people talking...look at them or the source, then Simply close your eyes. You can still focus on the radio, TV or people's conversations but now you can also intersperse your feeling on let's say...What is Norseen or Steve N doing, or how would my wife feel about the latest atrocity in Lebanon...Now, while you are feeling pretty comfortable dealing in the present hearing the TV, and also feeling what Steve or Norseen would be saying, or your wife, you suddenly feel a small portion of your body, like your elbow, being tugged by Jane and she just imparts a smile on your soul...These are all semiotics, but it takes a Reflexive Process to handle all three or four or twenty levels of overlapping mental communications.
There is testing that shows this process...when hunting animals, tigers let's say, are wired up with EEG and they are in the cage and then a picture of a PREY animal is shown, and the cage door is let up such that the creature knows it can soon be free and out of doors chasing the prey...the Brain State drops down into Theta instantaneously...Just as I can show when you close your eyes, by looking at Predator EEG, you can tell when they are engaging in the HUNT...or even suggests that animals do dream, because the EEG is still there in the sleep state. So what is going on in Theta: It is the last brain state where the cognitive functions can still be controllable, and also it is the longest wavelength and greatest distance interpretations that the Brain as EM interferometer works in the Earth Waveguide, just below the Schumann Frequency. The Tiger relies on its greatest search pattern to HUNT.
FIGURE 54: INSTRUMENT DESIGN COMPONENTS ARE LIKE SEMIOTICS.
FIGURE 54: INSTRUMENT DESIGN COMPONENTS ARE LIKE SEMIOTICS.
So this is very much what happens when you die...YOU go on the HUNT...and this shift can be seen and it becomes clear when you look at the Semiotic Screen. This is like the HUNT but distinctly different class. Like the two sailors on the WaterTown, they can even modify the EM of the physics for the camera and make their visage appear, just as Jane can suppress the volume and tonal keys on the stereo.
Uncanny that you talk about Semiotics and pets...I daily am amazed how my pet dogs get me to do all kinds of complicated things without human speech…only pet semiotics...the gradual look of the eye, the turn of the nose, the slight harrummphh of a bark, the plodding paws tapping out a frenetic rhythm, and it becomes very clear in my mind that they want to play, get some food, start the daily routine, and shortly to put on the leash, go out, smell around, and do their business…but mostly to put on a show for the other dogs that are milling about the neighborhood.
But YES, YES, YES...emotion is critical to the multimodal Semiotics, the semiotics of the HUNT – which primarily uses the hypothalamic structures such as the amygdala ( the bee sting pattern), and also the Semiotics of Death which reaches out the broadest search pattern, interlaced with the very precise mental patterns of a closely loved person.
Now can you imagine on the long submarine rides in radio silence during the cold war...the Sound and EM technicians listening so very quietly to the 4-8 Hz sounds of the beckoning deep...soon there are blips on the passive sonobouys that just don't belong to whales, or shrimps or krill, or even earth sounds, pressure waves and earthquakes — something that gets picked up not only across the spectrum but in very specific narrow bands as well that seem to affect the entire crew at times. And the blips begin to form correlations to dreams and to life-death-family cycles on the ship...sailors knowing when their wives give birth, or a daughter suddenly dies in a school bus accident, or a loved parent silently slips under two days before port call.
And then there is the evidence when the sailor or officer gets home…the half written letter dated the day of the weird dream, the radio set on a frequency channel for help until the battery died out, or the strange faces in the photograph on the last emulsion of the camera…the extra picture, number 25 on a full set of image-laden 24 frames.
Yes, DUNCAN…listen, feel and scan your emotions, and apply EMOTION to all of your Semiotics...The UNIVERSE becomes open when you do.
DUNCAN LAURIE
I am beginning to see what you mean about the transceiver function of the semiotics. Depending upon what frequency range they are broadcast from, they hit that frequency input range in the brain and nervous system. If our "consciousness" happens to be awake or tuned into that spectrum, the image is apprehended. If the signal is only subliminally felt, it may be stored somewhere, and maybe accessed in a dream or daydream. In cases of great intent, the signal may be stepped up from feeling into an eidetic image. With less intent, the semiotic could remain instinct, gut feeling, premonition, etc.
The notion of a semiotic as a force beyond information is still very vague however. When we start talking about semiotics "tugging" us or some other invasive behavior, we are talking about them doing "work" in the material world, as though they are a force of nature themselves. This week a movie is coming out about death, how it impacts a group of people, called 21 GRAMS. That number refers to the amount of weight loss occurring at death. So, assuming that is correct, and aside from some mass-free ZPE and a store of electrical activity, something with significant mass is discharged at death. Do semiotics create mass in the body?
Following your metaphor, when we send our attention out on the Hunt, even at the time of death, this attention is a unit of some kind. Maybe we send more out sometimes, maybe less, but something of ourselves with the capacity to probe and interpret, gets extended into the ZPE field to do work. This something at death apparently weighs 21 grams. This 21g hunter has emotion too, if my experiences with Jane are any example.
Say we live in an ocean of free-floating semiotics that inhabits a rarified atmosphere just behind our own. Some semiotics appear to have mass as well as energy because they impact our world in various ways, moving chains, slamming doors, etc. If they can do that much, intelligent semiotic beings may find their way into our lives in other mysterious ways we can't fully comprehend. Perhaps they are like Magellan’s ships anchored off shore that the Native islanders couldn't physically see, because the natives didn't have the ability to comprehend their existence, until the shaman made it possible.
The picture I am beginning to get of the semiotic animal is far more than your humble symbol or sign. The Norseen picture of semiotics is really a picture of alien intelligence. What is the difference between little gray men and autonomous semiotics manifesting intent from another dimension? Oh sure, the Grey men are there in the bed room gesturing, aren't they? Ghosts and aliens, not only pets, have semiotic powers that cause us to behave in ways they want us to. They make us run, scream, laugh, whimper and deny.
A lot comes down to what 21 grams actually consists of, doesn't it? Without that weight measurement, semiotics is only a clever intellectual device for the management and control of information systems. Add in the 21g and semiotics is a door into the X Files. Doesn't that about sum it up?
JOHN NORSEEN
Yes, you are doing a great job of taking my missives and turning up a cohesive and comprehensive application understanding of Semiotics... much like the book the Semiotics group put together in New Mexico concerning the role of complex adaptive systems and chaos. As physical beings, the Bandwidth occupied by Semiotic structures and the translations around the nexus of ZPE must necessarily occupy Mass...and 21 grams seems a decent figure...if a fly does one push up it is one erg...and if a person’s total mass is consumed in a nanosecond, there is enough energy to raise the Empire State Building one foot off the ground...so by playing around with these quanta...there is probably a pretty good guess that 21 grams is what we expend in a buildup of a lifetime of semiotic interactions. Some interesting percentage of the Gray Matter…of the 3 and 1/2 pound universe...how many grams is 3 1/2 pounds...and 21 grams of that is the percentage of bandwidth necessary for our Semiotic communications...if we need more Semiotics, then the bandwidth, the energy, the size of the brain and the species can then be ascertained. We could predict the amount of semiotics we would need to augment ourselves as we entered other alien communications realms. Another throughput study or Green function indicated that our brain could store and process approximately 1.7 million semiotics. The English language for instance is roughly 500,000 semiotics on an alphabet of 26. Accordingly, we could develop a culture about 3 times larger than the English system before requiring a more complex adaptive brain.
And your work is causing me to be more precise in my meandering of neural science. I watched a neurosurgeon in a real-time Brain Mapping operation on an elderly man with Parkinson’s disease. He used an electrode on the outer portion of the cerebrum to get the right hand to steady...but then he opened up the man's brain and went deep down into the hypothalamus, under the anterior cingulate and he went to the left side of the hippocampus horseshoe and mapped out another location of the brain that only affected the right hand. He then put a permanent electrode and pacemaker into that deep brain location. He then went back to the top of the brain, the top left portion and sure enough, the EEG readings of that top part of the brain became tuned with the deep electrode and the readings were exactly the same…and Voila, the right hand of the prior severely hand palsy shaking man became as steady and controllable as the finest pianist. The man could do anything, draw spirals, snap his fingers...anything. This man's internal semiotic I, O, and R — top and bottom were made intact.
Science Will Spawn New Technologies
Biologic Process Control
Semiotics
Noise
Invariant Mapping
Synthetic Species
Dream Injection
Why, this was none other than matching up the frequencies of the internal semiotics we possess as humans...We are the mirror frequency of ourselves...we carry a Sign/Symbol of ourselves in the outer portion of our brains. And we also carry an exact map of the Sign Symbol deep in our brain nearest our emotional understanding of the world...Our internal Semiotics is that we mirror reflect a Sign Symbol against the mirror image, but surrounded by emotional measurements... and vectors (aesthetics, etc). If we do an exact match of the top semiotics with the bottom semiotics we have perfect control of our being, we are centered.
So we carry within ourselves a dual-matching Semiotics — however, consider this, there are so many distractions and delusions of the top to the bottom of our brain that our Representamen which becomes our Interpretant of others is really a classic chasing an imperfect tail of another with the imperfect mirror of ourselves...Our top R is actually the bottom and the bottom R is actually the top of our brains...and OUR perfect I is the aligned top and bottom O's which is interpreting another person's imperfect top and bottom Semiotic chase. No wonder we can become inextricably perplexed-- unable to untie the knots of thought.
Perhaps this describes why it is so hard to really know another person, least of all truly understand ourselves...but it is possible...just like the surgeon was able to accomplish. If we get the semiotics all registering the same resonant frequency, then we get bandwidth lock in. And when we feel as if we are in the bandwidth of another, and they in us...then we are a more powerful Semiotic Interpreter Band of Brothers...but it also means that many things can unsettle the semiotic balance.
I find it absolutely great that the inventor of NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) (Magnetic Resonating Imaging), Dr. Raymond Damadian, used the radio frequency of cancer cells to show how they were at a different RF from normal cells and thus produced a unique Cancer Diagram or Semiotic. The strong suggestion of course being, if you can get cancer cells in the right frequency resonance, then you restore health...so what is health but perhaps...Semiotic Balance — where our cells, the R, are exact matches to the O as ruled by the DNA, RNA and genes…the I.
I just found out that my clearances have been updated. I go in for a new Top Secret indoctrination tomorrow. Also, at work, my computer and my phone and my office were taken down. I enter over the next few weeks, a new office, a new program, and new computer phone identities. Very odd.
In doing EEG's of Dolphins...they have a unique F grid interval Semiotic pattern distinct from humans...but the nature of being in water and the bounce patterns of the sea bottom need to be learned by the dolphin...if weird signals get into the dolphin semiotic balance act, the dolphin loses the sense of up and down, which in a spiral kill predatory team animal is the kiss of death. I bet you that if vets took the EEG of the marine mammals that wash up on the beach or swim up river or can't find their way, that they have a desynchrony in their normal EEG Swim Semiotics....just like the old man with palsy, they need to map the brain signals from the environment with the swim signals deeply embedded in their ZPE 'emotional' centers. I wonder how many grams the dolphin loses when it dies. And I bet you that we have already measured the loss and Puthoff, Beardon and others are doing the Death Calculations. If one could store such Death Energy in Semiotic Domes...imagine the REAL DEATH RAY that could be set on STUN.
The Four INTs
SIGINT — Signals Intelligence
IMINT — Imagery Intelligence
HUMINT — Human Intelligence
MASINT — Measurement and Signature Intelligence
MASINT is the newest, most encompassing, and technically complex of the four intelligence disciplines
Of Peircian Scientific Semiotics and its role in United States national security, I can honestly say that I was part of the inception in the early 1990’s and have watched over the last decade the growth from the first national security working group on scientific semiotics to where it is now a recognized science effort around the world...but with not nearly enough Book elucidation, and still lacking a dedicated National Scientific Philosophy linkage into National Security. Almost all of the pacing Soviet scholars that I have met are now dead or corrupted…and most of the working semiotics is now under a classified rubric. At least I can edify about the frolicsome years from 1995-2002 where no holds barred and semiotics as the New Occult held sway...try to search on Lycos with the terms NSA PSYOP...there is a link that you need to see…I will get it to you later. The link describes how semiotics and brain communications can be done covertly. Imagine that. 29
29 “Mind Control-L list”, Wes Thomas, Moderator posting by Will Filer on July 27, 1999, titled “Subliminal Implanted Posthypnotic Suggestions and Scripts Using Acoustically Delivered and Phonetically Accelerated Posthypnotic Commands without Somnambulistic Preparation in the Subject for Intelligence and Counterintelligence Applications by the United States National Security Agency”
---
15 SEMIOTICS and THE FLOW OF CAPITAL
DUNCAN LAURIE
In a recent email, I suggested that we, ourselves, may merely be Representamen of some higher semiotic intent that we do not comprehend. In a much less metaphysical sense, we already are if one considers the relationship between semiotics and currency, and how it governs our lives.
In certain respects you have painted a picture of semiotics which is akin to our bloodstream running through our body. We aren’t really aware of our blood until the skin is breached in some way, and then we realize our very existence depends upon keeping it circulating. Only a few millimeters of skin exist between life in this world and the next.
The semiotic stream has further parallels in the atmosphere and in the seas. When we look at culture, there is yet another significant parallel, the circulation of capital. Unlike systems designed by nature, the movement of capital circulates according to economic systems that are put in place by man. As one would expect, these models have to incorporate many natural features; cyclical rotations, cause and effect, supply and demand, etc.
As you expressed some time ago, “Semiotics are the currency of the universe.” So, if semiotics can be better understood by viewing them as currency, then it follows currency fluctuations can be better understood by observing them as semiotics.
This weekend I read an article by a financial writer named Addison Wiggin titled “The Era of Fictitious Capitalism”. 30 In it he reflects upon the observations of a Chinese bureaucrat named Wang Jian. To skip over a bit, Wang basically discusses the role China should play as a neutral power, should a war erupt between the United States and a united Europe.
“War is the extension of politics and politics is the extension of economic interests”, advances Wang. “America’s wars abroad have always had a clear goal; however, such goals were never made obvious to the public. We need to see through the surface and reach the essence of the matters. In other words, we need to figure out what the fundamental economic interests of America are. Missing this point, we would be misled by American government’s shows and feints.”
Wang’s argument quickly turns to economic realities. He points out that by the mid-seventies, the US, UK, France, Germany, Italy and Japan and other major capitalist countries have completed industrialization. Almost immediately, their currencies became disconnected from gold. “Economic growth as measured by GDP was no longer restricted by the growth of material goods production. Toss in a few financial innovations, like derivatives, and the “fictitious” economy assumed the central role in the global monetary system”, explains Mr. Wiggins. Read “fictitious” economy here as “semiotically leveraged” economy.
Then, in this revealing observation, Mr. Wang states: “Money transactions related to material goods production counted 80% of the total [global] transactions until 1970. However, only five years after the collapse of the Bretton Woods [gold standard] the ratio turned upside down — only 20% of money transactions were related to material goods production and circulation. The ratio dropped to .7% in 1997.”
Wiggins adds, “In the fictitious economy, the values for paper assets are only derived from the perceptions of the buyer and seller.” Suddenly we are really talking semiotics.
Wang elaborates: “In the era of fictitious capitalism a fictitious capital transaction can increase the ‘book value’ of monetary capital; therefore monetary capital no longer has to go through material goods production before it returns to more monetary capital. Capitalists no longer need to do the ‘painful’ thing — material goods production. During this process, the demand of money no longer comes from the expansion of material goods production; instead it comes from the inflation of capital price. The process repeats itself.”
“Fictitious capital is no more than a piece of paper, or an electric signal in a computer. Theoretically, such capital cannot feed anyone no matter how much its value increases in the marketplace. So why is it so enthusiastically pursued by the major capitalistic countries?”
Money is now completely non-material, no longer an Object, only a Representamen….a signal firing in the brain of the Interpretant.
FIGURE 55: PERCEPTION MANAGEMENT
FIGURE 55: PERCEPTION MANAGEMENT
The answer to Wang’s question is that the “major capitalist countries have been using their fictitious capital to finance the consumption of other countries’ material goods”, to paraphrase Mr. Wiggins. This is possible because the world balances its accounts in dollars. Reference is then made to the surge of capital into America from around the world during the 1990’s “new economy”, leading to an even greater inflation of fictitious capital, and seeming prosperity, etc.
Here we arrive at the crux of Wang’s argument that a war is brewing. “While ‘fictitious capital’ has been bringing to America economic prosperity and hegemonic power over money, it has its own inborn weakness. In order to sustain such prosperity and hegemonic power, America has to keep unilateral inflow of international capital to the American market…If America loses its hegemonic power over money, its domestic consumption level will plunge 30-40%. Such an outcome would be devastating for the US economy.”
There is apparently recognition by critics of a limit to the creation of “fictitious capital”; no one can do it indefinitely. There is also the political problem of the two classes of people this creates; the one tied to material production and the other creating money out of thin air.
“In the era of fictitious capital”, Wang surmises, “America must keep its hegemonic power over money in order to keep feeding the enormous maw in its consumerist belly.”
Now I don’t know how you would interpret Wang’s observations, but what I see is that currency semiotics substantially altered the perception of asset-based wealth in the financial markets in the 70’s. Coupled with the collapse of the gold standard, loosely secured semiotics unleashed a storm of ZPE into the minds of global merchants, resulting in the creation of a largely fictitious metric of wealth based upon market momentum. The explosion of world populations in conjunction with increased communications and diminished barriers to free trade appears to have unleashed an incredible Ponzi scheme onto a trusting public. Picture the new semiotic as one replicating an immensely powerful wave of greed, causing millions to throw down their life’s resources. Instead of fear causing you to throw down your crutches and run, as in the case of your bee sound semiotic episode, a compelling and irresistible semiotic of free money was electronically launched into the markets for those with the savvy to see how the game would now be played.
The template for this scheme was market tested through the arts, where media communications accelerated the distribution of electronically represented artistic products at a geometrically progressing rate across world populations. The bee’s shadow had become better than gold! In today’s semiotic paradigm, we create all the money we need by continually manipulating the notion of “value” in other semiotic systems.
The question is whether this sudden, devastating departure is just a product of man’s greed, or the infusion into the world mind of a calculated semiotic virus.
JOHN NORSEEN
It is just after 0530 and I am already in the office, with a lot of icy roads outside. I am here all alone in probably the world's largest hangar. Down the street we house the C-5 Jumbo Cargo Plane; three of them in a row under one roof—wild! They look like huge blue-gray air whales. Just standing under them is like looking up into the jaws of Tyrannosaurus Rex or the Vegan Brontosaurus. And then, in our windowless palace of concrete and RF Tempest shielding, I am surrounded by ideas and visions of all kinds of advanced earth and non-earth based aircraft designs. I keep trying to figure out what kind of craft Ezekiel was describing in the Bible...
But your paragraph triggered another example of the power of semiotics in the brain structure of humans. I am constantly rereading and devouring the Richard Cytowic book you sent me, Synthesthesia. I am really getting into his basic premise that our “Perception” is only the tip of the iceberg of what drives us. “Subception”, non-cognitive knowing, the lower decibels of the signal to noise ration of Cryptomnesia, makes up the vast majority of what drives our day to day and second to second lives. In reality, we are driven by 1/10’s of seconds worth of Semiotics that flash into our 5 Hz Theta loops — only to then get acted upon consciously by our 10 Hz Alpha loops. I keep coming across the impact of semiotics on “difficulties” in brain activities.
I recently watched a neurology presentation of a man who could see, but not understand, faces. He knew he was looking at faces, and the fMRI showed that the region for prosopopoeia, or seeing faces in the fusiform gyrus, was apparently acting normally, with blood flow activation and oxygen and energy utilization. However, the man could not place any Emotion, or Emotive Understanding of whose Face it was he saw. When looking at a picture of his face in a mirror, he eventually figured out it was his face, but only after a lengthy process of logical analysis of the other features in the mirror.
So what do we have here? First, a perfectly normal looking man and an apparently normal functioning brain structure. But using our NS, we can immediately tell that this man is lacking the Interpretant leg of the ORI NS. So, given our understanding of the ORI NS, we as neurosurgeons could begin to look for something Missing or Additive to this man's fusiform gyrus or other brain circuit element that is causing the Interpretant for Faces to be gone. Perhaps it is in the genetic makeup; there could be markers and instructions that detail how proteins need to twist and form to maintain the ORI NS across brain function. But CLEARLY, this man shows what happens when ORI breaks down. The complete function of EMOTION, and MEMORY, and SELF breaks down.
Now with this hypothesis in hand, let’s look again at ORI as the currency of the universe. I believe that if we posed the question to Cytowic, he would have to answer in the affirmative, that ORI is the underlying format of brain function...from the tip of perception to the huge iceberg of subception.
Quoting Duncan: “In certain respects you have painted a picture of semiotics which is akin to our bloodstream running through our body. We aren’t really aware of it until the system is breached in some way, and then we realize our very existence depends upon it.”
Here it is — Semiotics, and in particular, the Interpretant runs through our bodies and our thoughts and we aren't really aware of it until the system is breached in some way; the man who lost the understanding of faces is a primary example.
I am also in agreement that the Semiotic Structure is also a viable descriptor of the communications structure and protocol for Symbolic versus Gold/Production based economies. Your assessment of the fragility of an economy to Signals reminds me of the thrust of Bonfire of the Vanities by Tom Wolfe. His premise is that since the prohibition days, there is a huge Back Side economy made up of dirty, Non-Tax, barter dollars equal to or greater than the “legitimate” economy. The two are so inextricably mixed that one feeds the other, to the point where the US maintains a secret policy to bolster the dollar as the “currency” for both the legitimate and the non-legitimate economies. Furthermore, study after study confirms that the largest factor in the US economy is the Price per Barrel of Oil/Consumption Levels of Oil. The more we devour, the more we propel the economy. People are moving around, and when people move around they consume other items. It is this constant MOTION OF PEOPLE that is the primary force in the world economy, including the Back Side Dollar dominant, illegitimate, and non-Tax paying activities.
There is simply not enough Gold to actually tie gold to total Dollar transactions. So accordingly, gold has been replaced by Semiotics, the blood stream of the economy, just like the bloodstream of perception and subception. Further, study after study confirms that there is sufficient proven OIL in the ground to support the current and even a larger voracious appetite for US consumption of oil...particularly in Iraq and Saudi Arabia for at least an additional 300 years of unsolicited growth.
Given this, is it not obvious why the US staked its economy on establishing a stronghold in Iraq?
Just look at the power of Wal-Mart in America today. It is nothing other than a corporate logo, a semiotic for Chinese products, manipulated under a US dollar semiotic framework.
Now go back to the Sumerians and the Elohim. They were interested in one main earth item, Gold. Why, because it was directly tied to their Technology. They needed gold and convinced humans via the semiotics of religion to go get it for them. Then gold took on its own vectors in human nature and conflict until the world’s economies grew so large that they outsourced gold as the basic unit of reality/price, leaving only the Semiotics, or Religion of Economies — the Bonfire of the Vanities — to remain.
DUNCAN LAURIE
The Japanese Pokemon cartoon explosion: You talk about synchronicity, but the article below appeared in my mailbox just minutes before your “chemicals” email. Nothing you don’t already know, except that it seems to be written to entice investors into similar products. (As if they needed enticement; if I announced tomorrow that a show was going to produce epileptic seizures, every kid in America would be watching!) Nevertheless, I don’t think the writer got the trigger quite right; didn’t you say that it was an “explosion within an explosion”?
From James Boric: “It was Dec. 17, 1997 - 6:30 p.m. Anxious school kids all over Japan were huddled around their TV sets to watch the 38th-ever Pokemon episode - "Computer Warrior Polygon." It seemed harmless enough...
“The main character, Pikachu, had a mission. He had to go inside a computer and stop a deadly "virus bomb" from being dropped by the evil Polygon.
“The anticipated confrontation between good and evil came to a head twenty-one minutes into the show. Pikachu and Polygon met face to face to battle. Not wasting any time, Pikachu used his electric powers to destroy Polygon and stop the bomb from being detonated. It was an intense fight. And to heighten that intensity, the directors rapidly flashed a series of blue and red lights on the screen.
“Within minutes of the battle airing on TV, hospitals were flooded with calls. Pokemon viewers were suddenly suffering from acute nausea, blackouts and epileptic fits. There were even kids who entered into trance-like states, similar to hypnosis. One little girl described her sudden illness like this: "As I was watching the blue and red lights flashing on the screen, I felt my body becoming tense. I do not remember what happened after that."
“It turns out the combination of the colors, the flashing effect on the screen, and the duration of the fight scene created an optical stimulus that triggered instant attacks in thousands of Japanese viewers - leaving many temporarily helpless.
“Within hours the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare was investigating the Pokemon episode. TV Tokyo issued an apology and took the cartoon off the air. Even Japan's Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto weighed in with comments on the unfortunate situation.
“Clearly, this marked the end of Pokemon, right? I mean, come on. This cartoon sent a wave of panic over all of Japan. Twelve thousand kids experienced some form of temporary illness. And 618 children were hospitalized - suffering from bouts of memory loss, stiffening limbs and epileptic-type fits.
“Pokemon had its 15 minutes of fame; now it was over.
“WRONG!
“By April 1998, four months after the infamous fight scene, Japanese kids and parents demanded Pokemon re-air. They missed the lovable monsters.
“Sure enough, Pokemon was brought back. And by year's end, it was the third-most watched show in Japan!
“The obvious question that comes to mind is - how could parents actually allow (let alone demand) Pokemon to re-air? The answer is simple.
“Pokemon was an engaging show. It had children sitting at the edge of their seats wondering what would happen next. Plus, with its long list of characters, animation style and timely topics, Pokemon proved to be a tremendous learning tool for young kids. Seven-year-olds could rattle off more facts about Pokemon than they could about any other subject - period.
“Pokemon had appeal. And in 1999, it tipped from a Japanese sensation to a worldwide phenomenon - it was introduced to the United States on Nov. 22. The rest is history.” 31
JOHN NORSEEN
Yes, yes...it seems like some nerves were stimulated...no Poke-pUn intended!! Actually, the debate on the Pokemon incident on Japanese TV goes and continues to go much deeper...it was at a time when HDTV was in severe competition between the Japanese standards warring with the US, Canadian and British standards...without going into much detail right now...the US and the Brits decided to put a particular frequency filter on the data streams and it so far has kept most of these MIND POPS from blasting us but the person/persons behind this segment of the Pokemon show aired on December 17th is an unsolved mystery...who was the person that set up the “attack” -- no one seems to know -- they can't find the artist responsible for creating the animation, nor the scriptors/editors that entered the sequence into the final viewing...nor the station manager that set up the communications protocols, that let the thing air without filtering or shutting off. That is the plot...was it Japanese, foreign, no one is publicly stating. But you can believe it set up and still is causing quite a stir in the intelligence community...and in probably the most powerful agency in the world today...NTIA. NTIA looks at the Pokemon incident and the Doom Websites as if it were Terrorism or WMD. And the statistics are even larger than the article mentions...there were almost as many over 65 year olds affected with serious heart and nervous conditions. Children and old people tend to process visual information the same way…with most people between 10-65 in an inverted U shaped graph…inside the U, 10-65 year olds basically have a natural filter to the “strobe induced flicker vertigo” that was the main, but not the only, mind effects culprit in play.
OK, OK...quick back look here...What is pain as far as the brain is concerned? Receptor sites around the body attached to the central nervous system, with a flow of information going out from the brain...efferent and information flowing to the brain, afferent...and the transmitters for the various information signals are protein receptor sites with biochemical (potassium sodium) or electromagnetic, electric flow combinations...and as proteins, such as from swelling or from discharge commingle in the receptor sites with the signals...the local receptor sites attempt to characterize the type of pain, intensity of pain, and location of pain and sends this wrapped information to other pain sites and to the brain areas that regionally deal with this type of pain. So depending on the volume and size of the protein particles and the surge of the chemical or electrical flow rates, the Central Nervous system sets up a Pain Loop from the Brain to the Injured area, blood flow is increased, antibodies and clotting agents start and the body goes into a protective/mend mode with natural pain killers...the beta quinolines, the endorphins and encephalin released to fill in the disquieted protein receptor sites and to make them quit discharging information...to QUIET DOWN.
SECURITY
Four Stages of Culture
Protect Authority
Placate $ Makers
Subdue Trouble Makers
Engage Intruders
Now as I have indicated there are at least five different receptor site structures for Pain...alpha, mu, epsilon, kappa, delta...and depending on what mix, how many, where located, if afferent or efferent pathway, distance from brain, type of brain region that is involved, etc., etc. You get the bodies’ descriptions of 100+ different types of pain...from dull headaches to a sharp stabbing acid reflux. So pain is like Snow to an Arctic Inuit...what kind of snow/Pain???? Oh, that kind; put on this type of snowshoe. And then there is the Semiotic of the Pain Circuit. Once the pain circuit is established, there is a Pain Semiotic that also gets established, the memory of the pain sets up its own channel of Receptor Sites, so you can have Pain without a real injury merely by the memory of the pain opening up the Brain Semiotics of the Pain memory. That is why more and more Opiates are required to treat pain...why opioid tolerance sets in...it is similar to any other Addiction process. You drink coffee; the coffee nitrogen molecule (caffeine) links into and stimulates the nitrogen resonance of the central nervous system. It fills in the blank receptor sites, and the body says I need to make more receptor sites to link to more caffeine. And then you build more sites. It takes more coffee the second week to maintain a coffee high. And then you stop drinking coffee and the receptor sites begin to call out for stimulation to maintain the nitrogen-induced coffee high Semiotics...and there is no physical, or not enough, physical caffeine or nitrogen molecules to fill the empty receptor sites. And then the nervous system interprets this as a deficiency and sends REBOUND or shut down signals. SELL STOP signals to the body to batten down the hatches...and the body goes into withdrawals...psychological at first, and then physiological as more and more of the metabolism is involved.
So what you have is: receptor sites and basic semiotics. Then you get super selected Receptor Sites and Super Semiotics. Then you get Semiotics and dysfunctioning receptor sites; then you get sick receptor sites and sick semiotics until it finally dissipates or the Receptor sites somehow get filled back up again – usually via psychological or physiological Substitution.
So, going back to our NS model...Our Alpha 10 Hz Brain maintains a complete NS=O, I, R as an holographic, self supported image of ourselves that floats around in our mind's eye of the Panum's Fusion Space — or the Horopter Space, and accessible to us as mental imagining via signals from the anterior cingulate and fusiform gyrus primarily. Now we also have a complete Theta State 5 Hz Brain NS=O, I, R, but more like a sensory/perception ration Homunculus, self image of ourselves that we maintain mostly without conscious attention to detail, maintained with an associated mapping of our surroundings and goal oriented, time monitored, model of ourselves in the world, maintained in the Globus Pallidus, with many incursions into the hippocampus and amygdala.
FIGURE 56: AMYGDALA
FIGURE 56: AMYGDALA
And each of these self-models is intertwined with different ratios of the five pain receptors that set up individual, unique Pain Patterns and circuits of neurons associated with behavior. Thus you can have many, many different types of Pain...Thought induced pain, memory induced pain, damage induced pain, semiotic induced pain. But remember — All Pain is Semiotic, just different kinds of Semiotics!!!
Yes, once a powerful Semiotic is set up...one that BioFuses (BioFusion) the 10 Hz with the 5 Hz, with memory Semiotics, with addictive Semiotics (nitrogen and crystalline H2O resonance) — you have one BIG MOTHER OF ALL SEMIOTICS…and in this case ZPE is flowing freely at all levels of brain-behavior-memory-new channels…you are the not only the signal, but you are the ZPE. I believe the ZEN meditators and others describe this state — Nirvana, etc…. sublime serenity, Valhalla, the perfect mind, etc. Literally because you and the universe become fused!!!
And at smaller scales and levels, we get a glimpse of the sublime when we experience ZPE as semiotic when receptor sites fill up, lock and key extreme.
---------------------
Duncan, read the last few paragraphs of the James Bowman article, “Studies find pain is a matter of the mind. Brain reacts as much to another's hurt as to one's own.” 32 ...research about how the brain represents feelings...sounds like the Norseen Semiotic for sure!
“When it comes to feeling pain, some of it really is all in your head.
“Key regions of the brain appear to react as much to expectations and empathy as they do to actual painful stimulation, new studies demonstrate.
“The findings not only give fresh insight into how the human brain and nervous system work, but could open new opportunities for treating pain -- particularly pain for which there is no physical cause. Some, but not all, of the same pain-sensitive regions of the brain were as active when women watched male partners receiving a shock to the hand as when the women themselves got the jolt, British researchers report today in the Journal of Science.
“Likewise, activity in certain pain-sensing parts of the brain slacked off in subjects after an application of a cream they were told would lessen the pain of a mild electric jolt or heat to the skin, American scientists report in the same publication.
“The main point all this brings home is that the brain has mechanisms to directly control what we feel; it actively controls the flow of sensory information that results in our perceptions,” said Dr. Kenneth Casey, a professor of neurology at the University of Michigan and a neurology consultant to the VA Health Care System in Ann Arbor.
“At the University College of London, Dr. Tania Singer and colleagues monitored brain activation in 16 women when a painful shock was given to each woman's right hand or that of a male partner. These researchers found that only regions associated with subjective pain processing -- those that evaluate how unpleasant pain is and anticipate pain -- were active when the partner was subjected to the shock. Those and other brain regions were active when the women themselves were administered shocks.
“This suggests we use emotional representations reflecting our own subjective feeling states to understand the feelings of others,” Singer said. “Presumably, our ability to empathize has evolved from a system for representing our own internal bodily states.”
“All the studies reported today are part of a larger field of research that explores how the mind creates a representation of what another individual is experiencing.
“Our human capacity to 'tune in' to others when exposed to their feelings may explain why we do not always behave selfishly in human interactions, but instead engage in altruistic, helping behavior.” Singer said.
“She is doing more research to see if similar brain reactions occur between people who don't have an emotional bond.”
----------------
As I mentioned, the Pokemon incident was a test...a shot fired over the HDTV bow – putting Japan on notice not to mess with the US-British standards and also a test case to see what the effects would be on a small scale event for modeling basis. The perps, as in other strategic test cases, like certain web attacks and other infrastructure red alerts, get a “get out of jail card” in case they get snuggled up.
You used to get these kinds of national communications tests about once every year during the 50's-60's, and then every couple years in the late 70's-80's, and since the late 90's they have been heating up again. There is great interest in the power of information, and if it is legitimate to conceive of it as a WMD.
What you are describing is the power of Semiotics to implant and subvert a prior set of behavioral values (which you describe — savings, thrift, work ethic) into a new set of complex behaviors that are sought by a basically unseen, powerful control agent — the kind of rapacious devouring culture that is becoming the US — we are the most brutal, warrior-based culture on the planet — we have completely replaced the concepts of Genghis Khan, the Huns, the Tartars, Alexander, even Hitler, with our ability to unleash total devastating firepower...and for the most part, our military has reduced the potential enemy set from human to objects…semiotics to be obliterated.
As we approach 500 million people in 2025 and the nasties start flying, we are going to lash out at the world and “waste ½ of it” — if you look very carefully at the Semiotics that are being impressed on our culture you can see “Total War” as the dominant theme. F the UN, “just waste em” will be the mindset.
And yes, there are technologies already set up in advance, pre-positioned for the future border semiotic wars — rapid fire Stego Bullets, brain specific prions, multi-channel semiotic PSYOP — I can believe when people say they have signed documents concerning non-disclosure for 70+ years...I inked such forms myself.
FIGURE 57: NEW OFFENSIVE INFORMATION WARFARE (IW)
FIGURE 57: NEW OFFENSIVE INFORMATION WARFARE (IW)
Just as the underground, drug and contraband culture can co-exist and intertwine with the work-a-day tax and spend world, you can have a complete literal “underground” government of Dan Burisch's, by the 100,000's of thousands...and they never let you see them. Just look into Project Greek Island on any search engine...look at: Greenbrier, West Virginia, Mt. Pony, Raven Rock, Pa…the tip of the MOON-sized Ganesh Crystal.
DUNCAN LAURIE
I was watching Democracy Now, an alternative news broadcast on LINK the other night and they were talking about the vote fix in Ohio, a news story the mainstream finds generally unappealing. Of particular angst was the fact that Kerry, with plenty of ammunition for a recount and plenty of money, wouldn't do anything. He threw in the towel even before all the monkey-business was even fully documented. With two thrown elections; massive computer ballot fraud a likely possibility (the electronic ballot counting companies are private, i.e. proprietary software...); a war where private contractors are increasingly replacing the military (recruiting from Central America death squads); a populace increasingly resigned to another Vietnam; diminishing personal freedoms; the country going broke; there is only one reason for it that I can see, and that is because it is the plan – the plan to enslave the American people, with their permission.
JOHN NORSEEN
Duncan, you are correct. It is the plan...slow manipulation of the population into channels of control, like animals. Montana theory my good man, or better yet, the Aruba theory...either big sky or warm sky…got to go where the libertarian spirit and FREE WILL can conquer the Krylov Space aliens. Remember, there are huge, I mean huge camps already built in Alaska…care and feeding of millions of “detainees”…….
FIGURE 58: INFORMATION BATTLESPACE
FIGURE 58: INFORMATION BATTLESPACE
30 Wiggin, Addison, “The Era of Fictitious Capitalism”, 2003, http://www.mayanmajix.com/art429.html
31 Boric, James, “Epileptic Fits”, Penny Stock Fortunes (ed.), 2004
32 Bowman, Lee, “Studies find pain is a matter of the mind. Brain reacts as much to another's hurt as to one's own.”, Scripps Howard News Service, 2004
---
Appendix (Peircean Semiotics)
Overview of Peircean Semiotics
Who was Charles Sanders Peirce?
Born: Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1839
Died: Milford, Pennsylvania, 1914
Harvard educated
Career highlights:
Scientist: U.S. Coast Survey
Lecturer: Johns Hopkins University
Architect of philosophy of pragmatism
Pragmatism:
A fully developed, human-centered scientific method focused on reasoning
The only major philosophy developed by an American
Original name: “pragmatism”
What is Semiotics?
The theory or science of signs.
3 Major Disciplines
Semiology (Ferdinand de Saussure)
Semiotics (Charles William Morris)
Semeiotic (Charles Sanders Peirce)
Only “semeiotic” is based entirely on mathematics and logic
What is a Sign?
Peircean definition:
“Anything (R) which is so determined by anything else, called its Object (O), and so determines an effect upon a person, which I call its Interpretant (I).”
Peircean Triadic Sign
Peircean Triadic Sign
Complex conceptual structure reduced to a single triadic sign
Unique system - all others are dyadic (two-part)
Signs may be concatenated to construct concepts
Peircean system of logic developed from the sign
Laboratory Philosophy
Open system (exocentric)
User-centered
Closed loop self-control
Abstractively ordered system
Developed for scientists and engineers (traditionally unafraid of experimentation)
Impact of Peirce’s Philosophy On and Beyond Science
Physics
Language
Artificial Intelligence
Sociology
Literature
Cultural Studies, and many others...
Peircean Sign - 3 Basic Types
Peirce proved that the Triadic Sign can be concatenated. The Interpretant (I) becomes the Object (O) for the next sign.
Peircean Sign - 3 Basic Types
Peirce: Normative Science
Normative Science (facts interpreted with reference to their meaning or value)
Esthetics: “What should my purpose be?”
Ethics: “How should I control my activities while achieving my goals?”
Logic (Semeiotic): “How should I reason while focusing on problem solving?”
Speculative grammar: Examines what is requisite for representation of any kind.
Critic (narrow definition of logic): Formal science of the truth of representations; study of the reference of signs to their objects.
Speculative rhetoric: Studies how knowledge is transmitted; science of interpretation.
Warfare Applications
Cyberspace/information centric
NCW battle systems
Cognitive/information processing systems
Full Spectrum Dominance
Peircean Philosophy Outline courtesy of E. T. Nozawa, unpublished data 
